Produced by Paul Murray, Janet Blenkinship and the Online
Distributed Proofreading Team at http://www.pgdp.net







[Illustration: A CORNER OF THE AUTHOR'S GARDEN AT KIRKSTALL.]




HARDY PERENNIALS

AND

Old-Fashioned Garden Flowers:


DESCRIBING

THE MOST DESIRABLE PLANTS FOR BORDERS, ROCKERIES, AND SHRUBBERIES,

INCLUDING

FOLIAGE AS WELL AS FLOWERING PLANTS.


       *       *       *       *       *


BY JOHN WOOD.


       *       *       *       *       *


ILLUSTRATED.


       *       *       *       *       *


LONDON: L. UPCOTT GILL, 170, STRAND, W. C.

1884.

LONDON: PRINTED BY A. BRADLEY, 170, STRAND, W. C.




PREFACE.


At the present time there is a growing desire to patronise perennial
plants, more especially the many and beautiful varieties known as
"old-fashioned flowers." Not only do they deserve to be cultivated on
their individual merits, but for other very important reasons; they
afford great variety of form, foliage, and flower, and compared with
annual and tender plants, they are found to give much less trouble. If a
right selection is made and properly planted, the plants may be relied
upon to appear with perennial vigour and produce flowers more or less
throughout the year. I would not say bouquets may be gathered in the
depth of winter, but what will be equally cheering may be had in blow,
such as the Bluet, Violet, Primrose, Christmas Rose, Crocus, Hepatica,
Squills, Snowdrops, and other less known winter bloomers. It does not
seem to be generally understood that warm nooks and corners, under trees
or walls, serve to produce in winter flowers which usually appear in
spring when otherwise placed.

There are many subjects which, from fine habit and foliage, even when
flowerless, claim notice, and they, too, are described.

Many gardens are very small, but these, if properly managed, have their
advantages. The smaller the garden the more choice should be the
collection, and the more highly should it be cultivated. I shall be glad
if anything I say tends in this direction. From my notes of plants
useful memoranda may be made, with the object of adding a few of the
freest bloomers in each month, thus avoiding the error often committed
of growing such subjects as mostly flower at one time, after which the
garden has a forlorn appearance. The plants should not be blamed for
this; the selection is at fault. No amount of time and care can make a
garden what it should be if untidy and weedy plants prevail. On the
other hand, the most beautiful species, both as regards foliage and
flowers, can be just as easily cultivated.

The object of this small work is to furnish the names and descriptions
of really useful and reliable Hardy and Perennial Plants, suitable for
all kinds of flower gardens, together with definite cultural hints on
each plant.

Perhaps flowers were never cultivated of more diversified kinds than at
the present time; and it is a legitimate and not uncommon question to
ask, "What do you grow?" Not only have we now the lovers of the distinct
and showy, but numerous admirers of such species as need to be closely
examined, that their beautiful and interesting features may gladden and
stir the mind. The latter class of plants, without doubt, is capable of
giving most pleasure; and to meet the growing taste for these, books on
flowers must necessarily treat upon the species or varieties in a more
detailed manner, in order to get at their peculiarities and
requirements. The more we learn about our flowers the more we enjoy
them; to simply see bright colours and pretty forms is far from all the
pleasure we may reap in our gardens.

If I have not been able to give scientific information, possibly that of
a practical kind may be of some use, as for many years, and never more
than now, I have enjoyed the cultivation of flowers with my own hands.
To be able to grow a plant well is of the highest importance, and the
first step towards a full enjoyment of it.

I have had more especially in view the wants of the less experienced
Amateur; and as all descriptions and modes of culture are given from
specimens successfully grown in my own garden, I hope I may have at
least a claim to being practical.

I have largely to thank several correspondents of many years' standing
for hints and information incorporated in these pages.

                                                    J. WOOD.

  WOODVILLE, KIRKSTALL,

   _November, 1883._




ERRATA.


For the placing of capital letters uniformly throughout this Volume to
the specific names at the cross-headings, and for the omission of many
capitals in the body of the type, the printer is alone responsible.

Numerous oversights fall to my lot, but in many of the descriptions
other than strictly proper botanical terms have been employed, where it
seemed desirable to use more intelligible ones; as, for instance, the
flowers of the Composites have not always been termed "heads," perianths
have sometimes been called corollas, and their divisions at times
petals, and so on; this is hardly worthy of the times, perhaps, but it
was thought that the terms would be more generally understood.

  Page 7, line 8. For "lupin" read "Lupine."
  Page 39, line 31. For "calyx" read "involucre."
  Page 40, line 27. For "calyx" read "involucre."
  Page 46, line 1. For "corolla" read "perianth."
  Page 47, lines 3 and 6. For "corolla" read "perianth."
  Page 48, last line. For "lupin" read "Lupine."
  Page 60, line 16. For "pompon" read "pompone."
  Page 64, line 36. For "corolla" read "perianth."
  Page 102, line 27. For "Fritillaries" read "Fritillarias."
  Page 114, cross-heading. For "Ice-cold Gentian" read "Ice-cold
            Loving Gentian."
  Page 213. For "_Tirolensis_" read "_Tyrolensis_."
  Page 214, cross-heading. For "_Cashmerianum_" read "_Cashmeriana_."
  Page 215, cross-heading. For "_Cashmerianum_" read "_Cashmeriana_."
  Page 275, line 26. For "corolla" read "perianth."
  Page 284, line 25. For "calyx" read "involucre."
  Page 285, line 1. For "calyx" read "involucre."

                                                    JOHN WOOD.

  _November 14th, 1883._




HARDY PERENNIALS

AND

OLD-FASHIONED GARDEN FLOWERS.




Acæna Novæ Zealandiæ.

_Otherwise_ A. MICROPHYLLA; _Nat. Ord._ SANGUISORBEÆ,
_or_ ROSE FAMILY.


The plant, as may be seen by the illustration (Fig. 1), is small, and
its flowers are microscopic, hardly having the appearance of flowers,
even when minutely examined, but when the bloom has faded there is a
rapid growth, the calyces forming a stout set of long spines; these,
springing from the globular head in considerable numbers, soon become
pleasingly conspicuous, and this is by far the more ornamental stage of
the plant. It is hardy, evergreen, and creeping. It seldom rises more
than one or two inches from the ground, and only when it approaches a
wall, stones, or some such fixed body, does it show an inclination to
climb; it is, therefore, a capital rock plant. As implied by its
specific name, it comes from New Zealand, and has not long been
acclimatised in this country.

The flowers are produced on fine wiry stems an inch or more long, being
nearly erect; they are arranged in round heads, at first about the size
of a small pea; these, when bruised, have an ammoniacal smell. Each
minute flower has four green petals and brownish seed organs, which
cause the knob of flowers to have a rather grimy look, and a calyx which
is very hard and stout, having two scales and four sepals. These sepals
are the parts which, after the seed organs have performed their
functions, become elongated and of a fine rosy-crimson colour; they form
stiff and rather stout spines, often ¾in. long; they bristle evenly from
every part of the little globe of seed vessels, and are very pretty. The
spines are produced in great abundance, and they may be cut freely;
their effect is unique when used for table decoration, stuck in tufts of
dark green selaginella. On the plant they keep in good form for two
months. The leaves are 1in. to 2in. long, pinnate; the leaflets are of a
dark bronzy colour on the upper side and a pale green underneath, like
maidenhair, which they also resemble in form, being nearly round and
toothed. They are in pairs, with a terminal odd one; they are largest at
the extremity, and gradually lessen to rudimentary leaflets; the foliage
is but sparingly produced on the creeping stems, which root as they
creep on the surface.

[Illustration: FIG. 1. ACÆNA NOVÆ ZEALANDIÆ.

(One half natural size.)]

The habit of the plant is compact and cushion-like, and the brilliant
spiny balls are well set off on the bed of fern-like but sombre foliage.
During August it is one of the most effective plants in the rock garden,
where I find it to do well in either moist or dry situations; it grows
fast, and, being evergreen, it is one of the more useful creepers for
all-the-year-round effect; for covering dormant bulbs or bare places it
is at once efficient and beautiful. It requires light soil, and seems to
enjoy grit; nowhere does it appear in better health or more at home
than when carpeting the walk or track of the rock garden.

It is self-propagating, but when it is desirable to move a tuft of it,
it should be done during the growing season, so that it may begin to
root at once and get established, otherwise the wind and frosts will
displace it.

It blooms from June to September, more or less, but only the earliest
flowers produce well-coloured spines.




Achillea Ægyptica.

EGYPTIAN YARROW; _Nat. Ord._ COMPOSITÆ.


This is an evergreen (though herb-like) species. It has been grown for
more than 200 years in English gardens, and originally came, as its name
implies, from Egypt. Notwithstanding the much warmer climate of its
native country, it proves to be one of the hardiest plants in our
gardens. I dare say many will think the Yarrows are not worthy of a
place in the garden; but it should not be forgotten that not only are
fine and useful flowers included in this work, but also the good
"old-fashioned" kinds, and that a few such are to be found amongst the
Yarrows is without doubt. Could the reader see the collection now before
me, cut with a good piece of stem and some foliage, and pushed into a
deep vase, he would not only own that they were a pleasing contrast, but
quaintly grand for indoor decoration.

_A. Ægyptica_ not only produces a rich yellow flower, but the whole
plant is ornamental, having an abundance of finely-cut foliage, which,
from a downy or nappy covering, has a pleasing grey or silvery
appearance. The flowers are produced on long stems nearly 2ft. high,
furnished at the nodes with clean grey tufts of smaller-sized leaves;
near the top the stems are all but naked, and are terminated by the flat
heads or corymbs of closely-packed flowers. They are individually small,
but the corymbs will be from 2in. to 3in. across. Their form is that of
the common Yarrow, but the colour is a bright light yellow. The leaves
are 6in. to 8in. long, narrow and pinnate, the leaflets of irregular
form, variously toothed and lobed; the whole foliage is soft to the
touch, from the nappy covering, as already mentioned. Its flowers, from
their extra fine colour, are very telling in a cut state. The plant is
suitable for the borders, more especially amongst other old kinds.
Ordinary garden loam suits it, and its propagation may be carried out at
any time by root division.

Flowering period, June to September.




Achillea Filipendula.

_Nat. Ord._ COMPOSITÆ.


This grows 4ft. high, and the foliage, though fern-like, has an untidy
appearance, from the irregular way in which it is disposed. It is
herbaceous, and comes from the Caucasus. The flowers are somewhat
singular, arranged in corymbs of a multiplex character; they are very
large, often 5in. across. The smaller corymbs are arched or convex,
causing the cluster or compound corymb to present an uneven surface; the
small flowers are of rich old gold colour, and have the appearance of
knotted gold cord; they are very rigid, almost hard. The leaves are
linear, pinnate, lobed and serrated, hairy, rough, and numerously
produced. From the untidy and tall habit of this subject, it should be
planted in the background; its flowers, however, will claim a prominent
position in a cut state; they are truly rich, the undulating corymbs
have the appearance of embossed gold plate, and their antique colour and
form are compared to gold braid by a lady who admires "old-fashioned"
flowers. It will last for several weeks after being cut, and even out of
water for many days. A few heads placed in an old vase, without any
other flowers, are rich and characteristic, whilst on bronze figures and
ewers in a dry state, and more especially on ebony or other black
decorations, it may be placed with a more than floral effect. In short,
rough as the plant is, it is worth growing for its quaint and rich
flowers alone; it is seldom met with. Soil and propagation, the same as
for _A. Ægyptica_.

Flowering period, June to September.




Achillea Millefolium.

COMMON MILFOIL; _Nat. Ord._ COMPOSITÆ.


This is the well-known wild Yarrow; it is, however, the typical form of
a fine variety, called _A. m. roseum_, having very bright rose-coloured
flowers, which in all other respects resembles the wild form. Both as a
border subject and for cutting purposes, I have found it useful; it
flowers for several months, but the individual blooms fade in four or
six days; these should be regularly removed. The freshly-opened corymbs
are much admired. Soil and mode of propagation, the same as for previous
kinds.

Flowering period, June to November.




Achillea Ptarmica.

_Syns._ A. SYLVESTRIS _and_ PTARMICA VULGARIS; _Common
Names_, WILD YARROW, SNEEZEWORT, GOOSE-TONGUE, _and_ WILD
PELLITORY; _Nat. Ord._ COMPOSITÆ.


A very common British plant, or, I may say, weed, which can live in the
most reeky towns, only mentioned here to introduce _A. P. fl.-pl._,
which is one of the most useful of border flowers. I am bound to
add, however, that only when in flower is it more presentable than the
weedy and typical form; but the grand masses of pure white
bachelors'-button-like flowers, which are produced for many weeks in
succession, render this plant deserving of a place in every garden. It
is a very old flower in English gardens. Some 250 years ago Parkinson
referred to the double flowering kind, in his "Paradise of Pleasant
Flowers," as a then common plant; and I may as well produce Gerarde's
description of the typical form, which answers, in all respects, for the
double one, with the exception of the flowers themselves: "The sma