Produced by David Widger




THE GILDED AGE

A Tale of Today

By

Mark Twain and Charles Dudley Warner

1873



Part 1.

CONTENTS

CHAPTER I. Squire Hawkins and His Tennessee Land--He Decides to Remove
to Missouri

CHAPTER II. He Meets With and Adopts the Boy Clay

CHAPTER III Uncle Daniel's Apparition and PrayeR

CHAPTER IV The Steamboat Explosion

CHAPTER V Adoption of the Little Girl Laura--Arrival at
Missouri--Reception by Colonel Beriah Sellers

CHAPTER VI Trouble and Darkness in the Hawkins Family--Proposed Sale of
the Tennessee Land

CHAPTER VII Colonel Sellers at Home--His Wonderful Clock and Cure for
Rheumatism

CHAPTER VIII Colonel Sellers Makes Known His Magnificent Speculation
Schemes and Astonishes Washington Hawkins

CHAPTER IX Death of Judge Hawkins

ILLUSTRATIONS

FRONTPIECE COL. SELLERS FEEDING HIS FAMILY ON EXPECTATIONS
1.  CONTEMPLATION 2.  THE SQUIRE's HOUSE S.  THE U. S. MAIL
4.  OBEDSTOWN MALES 5.  HURRYING 6.  THE SQUIRE'S KITCHEN 7.  “FOR
GOODNESS SAKE SI” 8.  THE LAST COG WHEEL 9.  GONE UP 10.  TAIL PIECE
11.  THE ORPHANS LAST GIFT 12.  MRS HAWKINS AND CLAY AT THE GRAVE OF HIS
MOTHER 13.  “CHILDREN, DAR'S SUMFIN' A COMIN 14.  “HEAH I IS, LORD, HEAH
I IS!” 15.  TAIL PIECE 16.  NOT ENCOURAGED 17.  SHE'S GAINING 18.  “BY
THE MARK TWAIN!” 19.  FAST TOGETHER 20.  ONE OF THE VICTIMS 21.  THE
PROCESSION--FORWARD MARCH! 22.  THE HAPPY WIFE 23.  LAURA 24.  READY
TO SELL 25.  STOCK RISING 26.  A FAMILY COUNCIL 27.  TAIL PIECE
28.  ATTEMPTED CORNER IN SPECIE 29.  A BRILLIANT IDEA 30.  BIG THINGS
SHOWN UP 31.  COL. SELLERS BLOWING BUBBLES FOR WASHINGTON 32.  GEN
BOSWELL'S OFFICE 33.  TAIL PIECE 34.  CONSOLATION 35.  THE DYING FATHER
36.  TAIL PIECE

CHAPTER I.

June 18--. Squire Hawkins sat upon the pyramid of large blocks, called
the “stile,” in front of his house, contemplating the morning.

The locality was Obedstown, East Tennessee. You would not know that
Obedstown stood on the top of a mountain, for there was nothing about
the landscape to indicate it--but it did: a mountain that stretched
abroad over whole counties, and rose very gradually. The district
was called the “Knobs of East Tennessee,” and had a reputation like
Nazareth, as far as turning out any good thing was concerned.

The Squire's house was a double log cabin, in a state of decay; two
or three gaunt hounds lay asleep about the threshold, and lifted their
heads sadly whenever Mrs. Hawkins or the children stepped in and out
over their bodies. Rubbish was scattered about the grassless yard; a
bench stood near the door with a tin wash basin on it and a pail of
water and a gourd; a cat had begun to drink from the pail, but the
exertion was overtaxing her energies, and she had stopped to rest. There
was an ash-hopper by the fence, and an iron pot, for soft-soap-boiling,
near it.

This dwelling constituted one-fifteenth of Obedstown; the other fourteen
houses were scattered about among the tall pine trees and among the
corn-fields in such a way that a man might stand in the midst of the
city and not know but that he was in the country if he only depended on
his eyes for information.

“Squire” Hawkins got his title from being postmaster of Obedstown--not
that the title properly belonged to the office, but because in those
regions the chief citizens always must have titles of some sort, and so
the usual courtesy had been extended to Hawkins. The mail was monthly,
and sometimes amounted to as much as three or four letters at a single
delivery. Even a rush like this did not fill up the postmaster's whole
month, though, and therefore he “kept store” in the intervals.

The Squire was contemplating the morning. It was balmy and tranquil, the
vagrant breezes were laden with the odor of flowers, the murmur of bees
was in the air, there was everywhere that suggestion of repose that
summer woodlands bring to the senses, and the vague, pleasurable
melancholy that such a time and such surroundings inspire.

Presently the United States mail arrived, on horseback. There was but
one letter, and it was for the postmaster. The long-legged youth who
carried the mail tarried an hour to talk, for there was no hurry; and in
a little while the male population of the village had assembled to
help. As a general thing, they were dressed in homespun “jeans,” blue or
yellow--here were no other varieties of it; all wore one suspender and
sometimes two--yarn ones knitted at home,--some wore vests, but few
wore coats. Such coats and vests as did appear, however, were rather
picturesque than otherwise, for they were made of tolerably fanciful
patterns of calico--a fashion which prevails thereto this day among
those of the community who have tastes above the common level and are
able to afford style. Every individual arrived with his hands in his
pockets; a hand came out occasionally for a purpose, but it always went
back again after service; and if it was the head that was served, just
the cant that the dilapidated straw hat got by being uplifted and rooted
under, was retained until the next call altered the inclination; many
hats were present, but none were erect and no two were canted just
alike. We are speaking impartially of men, youths and boys. And we are
also speaking of these three estates when we say that every individual
was either chewing natural leaf tobacco prepared on his own premises, or
smoking the same in a corn-cob pipe. Few of the men wore whiskers; none
wore moustaches; some had a thick jungle of hair under the chin and
hiding the throat--the only pattern recognized there as being the
correct thing in whiskers; but no part of any individual's face had seen
a razor for a week.

These neighbors stood a few moments looking at the mail carrier
reflectively while he talked; but fatigue soon began to show itself,
and one after another they climbed up and occupied the top rail of the
fence, hump-shouldered and grave, like a company of buzzards assembled
for supper and listening for the death-rattle. Old Damrell said:

“Tha hain't no news 'bout the jedge, hit ain't likely?”

“Cain't tell for sartin; some thinks he's gwyne to be 'long toreckly,
and some thinks 'e hain't. Russ Mosely he tote ole Hanks he mought git
to Obeds tomorrer or nex' day he reckoned.”

“Well, I wisht I knowed. I got a 'prime sow and pigs in the cote-house,
and I hain't got no place for to put 'em. If the jedge is a gwyne to
hold cote, I got to roust 'em out, I reckon. But tomorrer'll do, I
'spect.”

The speaker bunched his thick lips together like the stem-end of a
tomato and shot a bumble-bee dead that had lit on a weed seven feet
away. One after another the several chewers expressed a charge of
tobacco juice and delivered it at the deceased with steady, aim and
faultless accuracy.

“What's a stirrin', down 'bout the Forks?” continued Old Damrell.

“Well, I dunno, skasely. Ole Drake Higgins he's ben down to Shelby
las' week. Tuck his crap down; couldn't git shet o' the most uv it; hit
wasn't no time for to sell, he say, so he 'fotch it back agin, 'lowin'
to wait tell fall. Talks 'bout goin' to Mozouri--lots uv 'ems talkin'
that--away down thar, Ole Higgins say. Cain't make a livin' here no mo',
sich times as these. Si Higgins he's ben over to Kaintuck n' married a
high-toned gal thar, outen the fust families, an' he's come back to the
Forks with jist a hell's-mint o' whoop-jamboree notions, folks says.
He's tuck an' fixed up the ole house like they does in Kaintuck, he say,
an' tha's ben folks come cler from Turpentine for to see it. He's tuck
an gawmed it all over on the inside with plarsterin'.”

“What's plasterin'?”

“I dono. Hit's what he calls it. Ole Mam Higgins, she tole me. She say
she wasn't gwyne to hang out in no sich a dern hole like a hog. Says
it's mud, or some sich kind o' nastiness that sticks on n' covers up
everything. Plarsterin', Si calls it.”

This marvel was discussed at considerable length; and almost with
animation. But presently there was a dog-fight over in the neighborhood
of the blacksmith shop, and the visitors slid off their perch like so
many turtles and strode to the battle-field with an interest bordering
on eagerness.

The Squire remained, and read his letter. Then he sighed, and sat long
in meditation. At intervals he said:

“Missouri. Missouri. Well, well, well, everything is so uncertain.”

At last he said:

“I believe I'll do it.--A man will just rot, here. My house my yard,
everything around me, in fact, shows' that I am becoming one of these
cattle--and I used to be thrifty in other times.”

He was not more than thirty-five, but he had a worn look that made him
seem older. He left the stile, entered that part of his house which was
the store, traded a quart of thick molasses for a coonskin and a cake of
beeswax, to an old dame in linsey-woolsey, put his letter away, and
went into the kitchen. His wife was there, constructing some dried apple
pies; a slovenly urchin of ten was dreaming over a rude weather-vane of
his own contriving; his small sister, close upon four years of age, was
sopping corn-bread in some gravy left in the bottom of a frying-pan and
trying hard not to sop over a finger-mark that divided the pan through
the middle--for the other side belonged to the brother, whose musings
made him forget his stomach for the moment; a negro woman was busy
cooking, at a vast fire-place. Shiftlessness and poverty reigned in the
place.

“Nancy, I've made up my mind. The world is done with me, and perhaps
I ought to be done with it. But no matter--I can wait. I am going to
Missouri. I won't stay in this dead country and decay with it. I've had
it on my mind sometime. I'm going to sell out here for whatever I can
get, and buy a wagon and team and put you and the children in it and
start.”

“Anywhere that suits you, suits me, Si. And the children can't be any
worse off in Missouri than, they are here, I reckon.”

Motioning his wife to a private conference in their own room, Hawkins
said: “No, they'll be better off. I've looked out for them, Nancy,” and
his face lighted. “Do you see these papers? Well, they are evidence
that I have taken up Seventy-five Thousand Acres of Land in this
county--think what an enormous fortune it will be some day! Why, Nancy,
enormous don't express it--the word's too tame! I tell your Nancy----”

“For goodness sake, Si----”

“Wait, Nancy, wait--let me finish--I've been secretly bailing and fuming
with this grand inspiration for weeks, and I must talk or I'll burst! I
haven't whispered to a soul--not a word--have had my countenance under
lock and key, for fear it might drop something that would tell even
these animals here how to discern the gold mine that's glaring under
their noses. Now all that is necessary to hold this land and keep it
in the family is to pay the trifling taxes on it yearly--five or ten
dollars--the whole tract would not sell for over a third of a cent an
acre now, but some day people will be glad to get it for twenty dollars,
fifty dollars, a hundred dollars an acre! What should you say to” [here
he dropped his voice to a whisper and looked anxiously around to see
that there were no eavesdroppers,] “a thousand dollars an acre!

“Well you may open your eyes and stare! But it's so. You and I may not
see the day, but they'll see it. Mind I tell you; they'll see it. Nancy,
you've heard of steamboats, and maybe you believed in them--of course
you did. You've heard these cattle here scoff at them and call them lies
and humbugs,--but they're not lies and humbugs, they're a reality and
they're going to be a more wonderful thing some day than they are now.
They're going to make a revolution in this world's affairs that will
make men dizzy to contemplate. I've been watching--I've been watching
while some people slept, and I know what's coming.

“Even you and I will see the day that steamboats will come up that
little Turkey river to within twenty miles of this land of ours--and
in high water they'll come right to it! And this is not all, Nancy--it
isn't even half! There's a bigger wonder--the railroad! These worms here
have never even heard of it--and when they do they'll not believe in it.
But it's another fact. Coaches that fly over the ground twenty miles an
hour--heavens and earth, think of that, Nancy! Twenty miles an hour. It
makes a man's brain whirl. Some day, when you and I are in our graves,
there'll be a railroad stretching hundreds of miles--all the way down
from the cities of the Northern States to New Orleans--and its got to
run within thirty miles of this land--may be even touch a corner of
it. Well, do you know, they've quit burning wood in some places in the
Eastern States? And what do you suppose they burn? Coal!” [He bent over
and whispered again:] “There's world--worlds of it on this land! You
know that black stuff that crops out of the bank of the branch?--well,
that's it. You've taken it for rocks; so has every body here; and
they've built little dams and such things with it. One man was going to
build a chimney out of it. Nancy I expect I turned as white as a sheet!
Why, it might have caught fire and told everything. I showed him it
was too crumbly. Then he was going to build it of copper ore--splendid
yellow forty-per-cent. ore! There's fortunes upon fortunes of copper
ore on our land! It scared me to death, the idea of this fool starting
a smelting furnace in his house without knowing it, and getting his
dull eyes opened. And then he was going to build it of iron ore! There's
mountains of iron ore here, Nancy--whole mountains of it. I wouldn't
take any chances. I just stuck by him--I haunted him--I never let
him alone till he built it of mud and sticks like all the rest of the
chimneys in this dismal country. Pine forests, wheat land, corn land,
iron, copper, coal--wait till the railroads come, and the steamboats!
We'll never see the day, Nancy--never in the world--never, never, never,
child. We've got to drag along, drag along, and eat crusts in toil and
poverty, all hopeless and forlorn--but they'll ride in coaches, Nancy!
They'll live like the princes of the earth; they'll be courted
and worshiped; their names will be known from ocean to ocean! Ah,
well-a-day! Will they ever come back here, on the railroad and the
steamboat, and say, 'This one little spot shall not be touched--this
hovel shall be sacred--for here our father and our mother suffered for
us, thought for us, laid the foundations of our future as solid as the
hills!'”

“You are a great, good, noble soul, Si Hawkins, and I am an honored
woman to be the wife of such a man”--and the tears stood in her eyes
when she said it. “We will go to Missouri. You are out of your place,
here, among these groping dumb creatures. We will find a higher 