LOVE & FREINDSHIP
AND
OTHER EARLY WORKS

A Collection of Juvenile Writings

By Jane Austen


CONTENTS

 LOVE AND FREINDSHIP
 LETTER the FIRST From ISABEL to LAURA
 LETTER 2nd LAURA to ISABEL
 LETTER 3rd LAURA to MARIANNE
 LETTER 4th Laura to MARIANNE
 LETTER 5th LAURA to MARIANNE
 LETTER 6th LAURA to MARIANNE
 LETTER 7th LAURA to MARIANNE
 LETTER 8th LAURA to MARIANNE, in continuation
 LETTER the 9th From the same to the same
 LETTER 10th LAURA in continuation
 LETTER 11th LAURA in continuation
 LETTER the 12th LAURA in continuation
 LETTER the 13th LAURA in continuation
 LETTER the 14th LAURA in continuation
 LETTER the 15th LAURA in continuation.

 AN UNFINISHED NOVEL IN LETTERS
 LESLEY CASTLE
 LETTER the FIRST is from Miss MARGARET LESLEY to Miss CHARLOTTE LUTTERELL
 LETTER the SECOND From Miss C. LUTTERELL to Miss M. LESLEY in answer.
 LETTER the THIRD From Miss MARGARET LESLEY to Miss C. LUTTERELL
 LETTER the FOURTH From Miss C. LUTTERELL to Miss M. LESLEY
 LETTER the FIFTH Miss MARGARET LESLEY to Miss CHARLOTTE LUTTERELL
 LETTER the SIXTH LADY LESLEY to Miss CHARLOTTE LUTTERELL
 LETTER the SEVENTH From Miss C. LUTTERELL to Miss M. LESLEY
 LETTER the EIGHTH Miss LUTTERELL to Mrs MARLOWE
 LETTER the NINTH Mrs MARLOWE to Miss LUTTERELL
 LETTER the TENTH From Miss MARGARET LESLEY to Miss CHARLOTTE LUTTERELL

 THE HISTORY OF ENGLAND

 A COLLECTION OF LETTERS
 To Miss COOPER
 LETTER the FIRST From a MOTHER to her FREIND.
 LETTER the SECOND From a YOUNG LADY crossed in Love to her freind
 LETTER the THIRD From a YOUNG LADY in distressed Circumstances to her freind
 LETTER the FOURTH From a YOUNG LADY rather impertinent to her freind
 LETTER the FIFTH From a YOUNG LADY very much in love to her Freind

 THE FEMALE PHILOSOPHER

 THE FIRST ACT OF A COMEDY

 A LETTER from a YOUNG LADY, whose feelings being too strong
 A TOUR THROUGH WALES—in a LETTER from a YOUNG LADY—

 A TALE.




LOVE AND FREINDSHIP


TO MADAME LA COMTESSE DE FEUILLIDE THIS NOVEL IS INSCRIBED BY HER
OBLIGED HUMBLE SERVANT THE AUTHOR.


“Deceived in Freindship and Betrayed in Love.”




LETTER the FIRST
From ISABEL to LAURA


How often, in answer to my repeated intreaties that you would give my
Daughter a regular detail of the Misfortunes and Adventures of your
Life, have you said “No, my freind never will I comply with your
request till I may be no longer in Danger of again experiencing such
dreadful ones.”

Surely that time is now at hand. You are this day 55. If a woman may
ever be said to be in safety from the determined Perseverance of
disagreeable Lovers and the cruel Persecutions of obstinate Fathers,
surely it must be at such a time of Life.

Isabel




LETTER 2nd
LAURA to ISABEL


Altho’ I cannot agree with you in supposing that I shall never again be
exposed to Misfortunes as unmerited as those I have already
experienced, yet to avoid the imputation of Obstinacy or ill-nature, I
will gratify the curiosity of your daughter; and may the fortitude with
which I have suffered the many afflictions of my past Life, prove to
her a useful lesson for the support of those which may befall her in
her own.

Laura




LETTER 3rd
LAURA to MARIANNE


As the Daughter of my most intimate freind I think you entitled to that
knowledge of my unhappy story, which your Mother has so often solicited
me to give you.

My Father was a native of Ireland and an inhabitant of Wales; my Mother
was the natural Daughter of a Scotch Peer by an italian Opera-girl—I
was born in Spain and received my Education at a Convent in France.

When I had reached my eighteenth Year I was recalled by my Parents to
my paternal roof in Wales. Our mansion was situated in one of the most
romantic parts of the Vale of Uske. Tho’ my Charms are now considerably
softened and somewhat impaired by the Misfortunes I have undergone, I
was once beautiful. But lovely as I was the Graces of my Person were
the least of my Perfections. Of every accomplishment accustomary to my
sex, I was Mistress. When in the Convent, my progress had always
exceeded my instructions, my Acquirements had been wonderfull for my
age, and I had shortly surpassed my Masters.

In my Mind, every Virtue that could adorn it was centered; it was the
Rendez-vous of every good Quality and of every noble sentiment.

A sensibility too tremblingly alive to every affliction of my Freinds,
my Acquaintance and particularly to every affliction of my own, was my
only fault, if a fault it could be called. Alas! how altered now! Tho’
indeed my own Misfortunes do not make less impression on me than they
ever did, yet now I never feel for those of an other. My
accomplishments too, begin to fade—I can neither sing so well nor Dance
so gracefully as I once did—and I have entirely forgot the _Minuet Dela
Cour_.

Adeiu.
Laura.




LETTER 4th
LAURA to MARIANNE


Our neighbourhood was small, for it consisted only of your Mother. She
may probably have already told you that being left by her Parents in
indigent Circumstances she had retired into Wales on eoconomical
motives. There it was our freindship first commenced. Isobel was then
one and twenty. Tho’ pleasing both in her Person and Manners (between
ourselves) she never possessed the hundredth part of my Beauty or
Accomplishments. Isabel had seen the World. She had passed 2 Years at
one of the first Boarding-schools in London; had spent a fortnight in
Bath and had supped one night in Southampton.

“Beware my Laura (she would often say) Beware of the insipid Vanities
and idle Dissipations of the Metropolis of England; Beware of the
unmeaning Luxuries of Bath and of the stinking fish of Southampton.”

“Alas! (exclaimed I) how am I to avoid those evils I shall never be
exposed to? What probability is there of my ever tasting the
Dissipations of London, the Luxuries of Bath, or the stinking Fish of
Southampton? I who am doomed to waste my Days of Youth and Beauty in an
humble Cottage in the Vale of Uske.”

Ah! little did I then think I was ordained so soon to quit that humble
Cottage for the Deceitfull Pleasures of the World.

Adeiu.
Laura.




LETTER 5th
LAURA to MARIANNE


One Evening in December as my Father, my Mother and myself, were
arranged in social converse round our Fireside, we were on a sudden
greatly astonished, by hearing a violent knocking on the outward door
of our rustic Cot.

My Father started—“What noise is that,” (said he.) “It sounds like a
loud rapping at the door”—(replied my Mother.) “it does indeed.” (cried
I.) “I am of your opinion; (said my Father) it certainly does appear to
proceed from some uncommon violence exerted against our unoffending
door.” “Yes (exclaimed I) I cannot help thinking it must be somebody
who knocks for admittance.”

“That is another point (replied he;) We must not pretend to determine
on what motive the person may knock—tho’ that someone _does_ rap at the
door, I am partly convinced.”

Here, a 2d tremendous rap interrupted my Father in his speech, and
somewhat alarmed my Mother and me.

“Had we better not go and see who it is? (said she) the servants are
out.” “I think we had.” (replied I.) “Certainly, (added my Father) by
all means.” “Shall we go now?” (said my Mother,) “The sooner the
better.” (answered he.) “Oh! let no time be lost” (cried I.)

A third more violent Rap than ever again assaulted our ears. “I am
certain there is somebody knocking at the Door.” (said my Mother.) “I
think there must,” (replied my Father) “I fancy the servants are
returned; (said I) I think I hear Mary going to the Door.” “I’m glad of
it (cried my Father) for I long to know who it is.”

I was right in my conjecture; for Mary instantly entering the Room,
informed us that a young Gentleman and his Servant were at the door,
who had lossed their way, were very cold and begged leave to warm
themselves by our fire.

“Won’t you admit them?” (said I.) “You have no objection, my Dear?”
(said my Father.) “None in the World.” (replied my Mother.)

Mary, without waiting for any further commands immediately left the
room and quickly returned introducing the most beauteous and amiable
Youth, I had ever beheld. The servant she kept to herself.

My natural sensibility had already been greatly affected by the
sufferings of the unfortunate stranger and no sooner did I first behold
him, than I felt that on him the happiness or Misery of my future Life
must depend.

Adeiu.
Laura.




LETTER 6th
LAURA to MARIANNE


The noble Youth informed us that his name was Lindsay—for particular
reasons however I shall conceal it under that of Talbot. He told us
that he was the son of an English Baronet, that his Mother had been for
many years no more and that he had a Sister of the middle size. “My
Father (he continued) is a mean and mercenary wretch—it is only to such
particular freinds as this Dear Party that I would thus betray his
failings. Your Virtues my amiable Polydore (addressing himself to my
father) yours Dear Claudia and yours my Charming Laura call on me to
repose in you, my confidence.” We bowed. “My Father seduced by the
false glare of Fortune and the Deluding Pomp of Title, insisted on my
giving my hand to Lady Dorothea. No never exclaimed I. Lady Dorothea is
lovely and Engaging; I prefer no woman to her; but know Sir, that I
scorn to marry her in compliance with your Wishes. No! Never shall it
be said that I obliged my Father.”

We all admired the noble Manliness of his reply. He continued.

“Sir Edward was surprised; he had perhaps little expected to meet with
so spirited an opposition to his will. “Where, Edward in the name of
wonder (said he) did you pick up this unmeaning gibberish? You have
been studying Novels I suspect.” I scorned to answer: it would have
been beneath my dignity. I mounted my Horse and followed by my faithful
William set forth for my Aunts.”

“My Father’s house is situated in Bedfordshire, my Aunt’s in Middlesex,
and tho’ I flatter myself with being a tolerable proficient in
Geography, I know not how it happened, but I found myself entering this
beautifull Vale which I find is in South Wales, when I had expected to
have reached my Aunts.”

“After having wandered some time on the Banks of the Uske without
knowing which way to go, I began to lament my cruel Destiny in the
bitterest and most pathetic Manner. It was now perfectly dark, not a
single star was there to direct my steps, and I know not what might
have befallen me had I not at length discerned thro’ the solemn Gloom
that surrounded me a distant light, which as I approached it, I
discovered to be the chearfull Blaze of your fire. Impelled by the
combination of Misfortunes under which I laboured, namely Fear, Cold
and Hunger I hesitated not to ask admittance which at length I have
gained; and now my Adorable Laura (continued he taking my Hand) when
may I hope to receive that reward of all the painfull sufferings I have
undergone during the course of my attachment to you, to which I have
ever aspired. Oh! when will you reward me with Yourself?”

“This instant, Dear and Amiable Edward.” (replied I.). We were
immediately united by my Father, who tho’ he had never taken orders had
been bred to the Church.

Adeiu.
Laura.




LETTER 7th
LAURA to MARIANNE


We remained but a few days after our Marriage, in the Vale of Uske.
After taking an affecting Farewell of my Father, my Mother and my
Isabel, I accompanied Edward to his Aunt’s in Middlesex. Philippa
received us both with every expression of affectionate Love. My arrival
was indeed a most agreable surprise to her as she had not only been
totally ignorant of my Marriage with her Nephew, but had never even had
the slightest idea of there being such a person in the World.

Augusta, the sister of Edward was on a visit to her when we arrived. I
found her exactly what her Brother had described her to be—of the
middle size. She received me with equal surprise though not with equal
Cordiality, as Philippa. There was a disagreable coldness and
Forbidding Reserve in her reception of me which was equally distressing
and Unexpected. None of that interesting Sensibility or amiable
simpathy in her manners and Address to me when we first met which
should have distinguished our introduction to each other. Her Language
was neither warm, nor affectionate, her expressions of regard were
neither animated nor cordial; her arms were not opened to receive me to
her Heart, tho’ my own were extended to press her to mine.

A short Conversation between Augusta and her Brother, which I
accidentally overheard encreased my dislike to her, and convinced me
that her Heart was no more formed for the soft ties of Love than for
the endearing intercourse of Freindship.

“But do you think that my Father will ever be reconciled to this
imprudent connection?” (said Augusta.)

“Augusta (replied the noble Youth) I thought you had a better opinion
of me, than to imagine I would so abjectly degrade myself as to
consider my Father’s Concurrence in any of my affairs, either of
Consequence or concern to me. Tell me Augusta with sincerity; did you
ever know me consult his inclinations or follow his Advice in the least
trifling Particular since the age of fifteen?”

“Edward (replied she) you are surely too diffident in your own praise.
Since you were fifteen only! My Dear Brother since you were five years
old, I entirely acquit you of ever having willingly contributed to the
satisfaction of your Father. But still I am not without apprehensions
of your being shortly obliged to degrade yourself in your own eyes by
seeking a support for your wife in the Generosity of Sir Edward.”

“Never, never Augusta will I so demean myself. (said Edward). Support!
What support will Laura want which she can receive from him?”

“Only those very insignificant ones of Victuals and Drink.” (answered
she.)

“Victuals and Drink! (replied my Husband in a most nobly contemptuous
Manner) and dost thou then imagine that there is no other support for
an exalted mind (such as is my Laura’s) than the mean and indelicate
employment of Eating and Drinking?”

“None that I know of, so efficacious.” (returned Augusta).

“And did you then never feel the pleasing Pangs of Love, Augusta?
(replied my Edward). Does it appear impossible to your vile and
corrupted Palate, to exist on Love? Can you not conceive the Luxury of
living in every distress that Poverty can inflict, with the object of
your tenderest affection?”

“You are too ridiculous (said Augusta) to argue with; perhaps however
you may in time be convinced that...”

Here I was prevented from hearing the remainder of her speech, by the
appearance of a very Handsome young Woman, who was ushured into the
Room at the Door of which 