Produced by Alfred J. Drake.  HTML version by Al Haines.










THE PICTURE OF DORIAN GRAY


by

Oscar Wilde





1890, 13-CHAPTER VERSION



CONTENTS

  Chapter I: 3-12
  Chapter II: 12-22
  Chapter III: 22-32
  Chapter IV: 32-36
  Chapter V: 36-43
  Chapter VI: 43-52
  Chapter VII: 52-58
  Chapter VIII: 58-64
  Chapter IX: 65-77
  Chapter X: 77-81
  Chapter XI: 81-86
  Chapter XII: 86-93
  Chapter XIII: 94-100



CHAPTER I

[3] The studio was filled with the rich odor of roses, and when the
light summer wind stirred amidst the trees of the garden there came
through the open door the heavy scent of the lilac, or the more
delicate perfume of the pink-flowering thorn.

From the corner of the divan of Persian saddle-bags on which he was
lying, smoking, as usual, innumerable cigarettes, Lord Henry Wotton
could just catch the gleam of the honey-sweet and honey-colored
blossoms of the laburnum, whose tremulous branches seemed hardly able
to bear the burden of a beauty so flame-like as theirs; and now and
then the fantastic shadows of birds in flight flitted across the long
tussore-silk curtains that were stretched in front of the huge window,
producing a kind of momentary Japanese effect, and making him think of
those pallid jade-faced painters who, in an art that is necessarily
immobile, seek to convey the sense of swiftness and motion.  The sullen
murmur of the bees shouldering their way through the long unmown grass,
or circling with monotonous insistence round the black-crocketed spires
of the early June hollyhocks, seemed to make the stillness more
oppressive, and the dim roar of London was like the bourdon note of a
distant organ.

In the centre of the room, clamped to an upright easel, stood the
full-length portrait of a young man of extraordinary personal beauty,
and in front of it, some little distance away, was sitting the artist
himself, Basil Hallward, whose sudden disappearance some years ago
caused, at the time, such public excitement, and gave rise to so many
strange conjectures.

As he looked at the gracious and comely form he had so skilfully
mirrored in his art, a smile of pleasure passed across his face, and
seemed about to linger there.  But he suddenly started up, and, closing
[4] his eyes, placed his fingers upon the lids, as though he sought to
imprison within his brain some curious dream from which he feared he
might awake.

"It is your best work, Basil, the best thing you have ever done," said
Lord Henry, languidly.  "You must certainly send it next year to the
Grosvenor.  The Academy is too large and too vulgar.  The Grosvenor is
the only place."

"I don't think I will send it anywhere," he answered, tossing his head
back in that odd way that used to make his friends laugh at him at
Oxford.  "No: I won't send it anywhere."

Lord Henry elevated his eyebrows, and looked at him in amazement
through the thin blue wreaths of smoke that curled up in such fanciful
whorls from his heavy opium-tainted cigarette.  "Not send it anywhere?
My dear fellow, why?  Have you any reason?  What odd chaps you painters
are!  You do anything in the world to gain a reputation. As soon as you
have one, you seem to want to throw it away.  It is silly of you, for
there is only one thing in the world worse than being talked about, and
that is not being talked about.  A portrait like this would set you far
above all the young men in England, and make the old men quite jealous,
if old men are ever capable of any emotion."

"I know you will laugh at me," he replied, "but I really can't exhibit
it.  I have put too much of myself into it."

Lord Henry stretched his long legs out on the divan and shook with
laughter.

"Yes, I knew you would laugh; but it is quite true, all the same."

"Too much of yourself in it!  Upon my word, Basil, I didn't know you
were so vain; and I really can't see any resemblance between you, with
your rugged strong face and your coal-black hair, and this young
Adonis, who looks as if he was made of ivory and rose-leaves.  Why, my
dear Basil, he is a Narcissus, and you--well, of course you have an
intellectual expression, and all that.  But beauty, real beauty, ends
where an intellectual expression begins.  Intellect is in itself an
exaggeration, and destroys the harmony of any face.  The moment one
sits down to think, one becomes all nose, or all forehead, or something
horrid.  Look at the successful men in any of the learned professions.
How perfectly hideous they are!  Except, of course, in the Church.  But
then in the Church they don't think.  A bishop keeps on saying at the
age of eighty what he was told to say when he was a boy of eighteen,
and consequently he always looks absolutely delightful.  Your
mysterious young friend, whose name you have never told me, but whose
picture really fascinates me, never thinks.  I feel quite sure of that.
He is a brainless, beautiful thing, who should be always here in winter
when we have no flowers to look at, and always here in summer when we
want something to chill our intelligence.  Don't flatter yourself,
Basil: you are not in the least like him."

"You don't understand me, Harry.  Of course I am not like him.  I know
that perfectly well.  Indeed, I should be sorry to look like him.  You
shrug your shoulders?  I am telling you the truth.  There is a fatality
about all physical and intellectual distinction, the sort of fatality
that [5] seems to dog through history the faltering steps of kings.  It
is better not to be different from one's fellows. The ugly and the
stupid have the best of it in this world.  They can sit quietly and
gape at the play.  If they know nothing of victory, they are at least
spared the knowledge of defeat.  They live as we all should live,
undisturbed, indifferent, and without disquiet. They neither bring ruin
upon others nor ever receive it from alien hands.  Your rank and
wealth, Harry; my brains, such as they are,--my fame, whatever it may
be worth; Dorian Gray's good looks,--we will all suffer for what the
gods have given us, suffer terribly."

"Dorian Gray? is that his name?" said Lord Henry, walking across the
studio towards Basil Hallward.

"Yes; that is his name.  I didn't intend to tell it to you."

"But why not?"

"Oh, I can't explain.  When I like people immensely I never tell their
names to any one.  It seems like surrendering a part of them. You know
how I love secrecy.  It is the only thing that can make modern life
wonderful or mysterious to us.  The commonest thing is delightful if
one only hides it.  When I leave town I never tell my people where I am
going.  If I did, I would lose all my pleasure.  It is a silly habit, I
dare say, but somehow it seems to bring a great deal of romance into
one's life.  I suppose you think me awfully foolish about it?"

"Not at all," answered Lord Henry, laying his hand upon his shoulder;
"not at all, my dear Basil.  You seem to forget that I am married, and
the one charm of marriage is that it makes a life of deception
necessary for both parties.  I never know where my wife is, and my wife
never knows what I am doing.  When we meet,--we do meet occasionally,
when we dine out together, or go down to the duke's,--we tell each
other the most absurd stories with the most serious faces.  My wife is
very good at it,--much better, in fact, than I am. She never gets
confused over her dates, and I always do.  But when she does find me
out, she makes no row at all.  I sometimes wish she would; but she
merely laughs at me."

"I hate the way you talk about your married life, Harry," said Basil
Hallward, shaking his hand off, and strolling towards the door that led
into the garden.  "I believe that you are really a very good husband,
but that you are thoroughly ashamed of your own virtues. You are an
extraordinary fellow.  You never say a moral thing, and you never do a
wrong thing.  Your cynicism is simply a pose."

"Being natural is simply a pose, and the most irritating pose I know,"
cried Lord Henry, laughing; and the two young men went out into the
garden together, and for a time they did not speak.

After a long pause Lord Henry pulled out his watch.  "I am afraid I
must be going, Basil," he murmured, "and before I go I insist on your
answering a question I put to you some time ago."

"What is that?" asked Basil Hallward, keeping his eyes fixed on the
ground.

"You know quite well."

"I do not, Harry."

[6] "Well, I will tell you what it is."

"Please don't."

"I must.  I want you to explain to me why you won't exhibit Dorian
Gray's picture.  I want the real reason."

"I told you the real reason."

"No, you did not.  You said it was because there was too much of
yourself in it.  Now, that is childish."

"Harry," said Basil Hallward, looking him straight in the face, "every
portrait that is painted with feeling is a portrait of the artist, not
of the sitter.  The sitter is merely the accident, the occasion.  It is
not he who is revealed by the painter; it is rather the painter who, on
the colored canvas, reveals himself.  The reason I will not exhibit
this picture is that I am afraid that I have shown with it the secret
of my own soul."

Lord Harry laughed.  "And what is that?" he asked.

"I will tell you," said Hallward; and an expression of perplexity came
over his face.

"I am all expectation, Basil," murmured his companion, looking at him.

"Oh, there is really very little to tell, Harry," answered the young
painter; "and I am afraid you will hardly understand it.  Perhaps you
will hardly believe it."

Lord Henry smiled, and, leaning down, plucked a pink-petalled daisy
from the grass, and examined it.  "I am quite sure I shall understand
it," he replied, gazing intently at the little golden white-feathered
disk, "and I can believe anything, provided that it is incredible."

The wind shook some blossoms from the trees, and the heavy lilac
blooms, with their clustering stars, moved to and fro in the languid
air.  A grasshopper began to chirrup in the grass, and a long thin
dragon-fly floated by on its brown gauze wings.  Lord Henry felt as if
he could hear Basil Hallward's heart beating, and he wondered what was
coming.

"Well, this is incredible," repeated Hallward, rather
bitterly,--"incredible to me at times.  I don't know what it means.
The story is simply this.  Two months ago I went to a crush at Lady
Brandon's. You know we poor painters have to show ourselves in society
from time to time, just to remind the public that we are not savages.
With an evening coat and a white tie, as you told me once, anybody,
even a stock-broker, can gain a reputation for being civilized.  Well,
after I had been in the room about ten minutes, talking to huge
overdressed dowagers and tedious Academicians, I suddenly became
conscious that some one was looking at me.  I turned half-way round,
and saw Dorian Gray for the first time.  When our eyes met, I felt that
I was growing pale.  A curious instinct of terror came over me.  I knew
that I had come face to face with some one whose mere personality was
so fascinating that, if I allowed it to do so, it would absorb my whole
nature, my whole soul, my very art itself.  I did not want any external
influence in my life.  You know yourself, Harry, how independent I am
by nature.  My father destined me for the army.  I insisted on [7]
going to Oxford.  Then he made me enter my name at the Middle Temple.
Before I had eaten half a dozen dinners I gave up the Bar, and
announced my intention of becoming a painter.  I have always been my
own master; had at least always been so, till I met Dorian Gray.
Then--But I don't know how to explain it to you. Something seemed to
tell me that I was on the verge of a terrible crisis in my life.  I had
a strange feeling that Fate had in store for me exquisite joys and
exquisite sorrows.  I knew that if I spoke to Dorian I would become
absolutely devoted to him, and that I ought not to speak to him.  I
grew afraid, and turned to quit the room.  It was not conscience that
made me do so: it was cowardice.  I take no credit to myself for trying
to escape."

"Conscience and cowardice are really the same things, Basil. Conscience
is the trade-name of the firm.  That is all."

"I don't believe that, Harry.  However, whatever was my motive,--and it
may have been pride, for I used to be very proud,--I certainly
struggled to the door.  There, of course, I stumbled against Lady
Brandon.  'You are not going to run away so soon, Mr. Hallward?' she
screamed out.  You know her shrill horrid voice?"

"Yes; she is a peacock in everything but beauty," said Lord Henry,
pulling the daisy to bits with his long, nervous fingers.

"I could not get rid of her.  She brought me up to Royalties, and
people with Stars and Garters, and elderly ladies with gigantic tiaras
and hooked noses.  She spoke of me as her dearest friend.  I had only
met her once before, but she took it into her head to lionize me.  I
believe some picture of mine had made a great success at the time, at
least had been chattered about in the penny newspapers, which is the
nineteenth-century standard of immortality. Suddenly I found myself
face to face with the young man whose personality had so strangely
stirred me.  We were quite close, almost touching.  Our eyes met again.
It was mad of me, but I asked Lady Brandon to introduce me to him.
Perhaps it was not so mad, after all.  It was simply inevitable.  We
would have spoken to each other without any introduction.  I am sure of
that.  Dorian told me so afterwards.  He, too, felt that we were
destined to know each other."

"And how did Lady Brandon describe this wonderful young man?  I know
she goes in for giving a rapid précis of all her guests.  I remember
her bringing me up to a most truculent and red-faced old gentleman
covered all over with orders and ribbons, and hissing into my ear, in a
tragic whisper which must have been perfectly audible to everybody in
the room, something like 'Sir Humpty Dumpty--you know--Afghan
frontier--Russian intrigues: very successful man--wife killed by an
elephant--quite inconsolable--wants to marry a beautiful American
widow--everybody does nowadays--hates Mr. Gladstone--but very much
interested in beetles: ask him what he thinks of Schouvaloff.'  I
simply fled.  I like to find out people for myself.  But poor Lady
Brandon treats her guests exactly as an auctioneer treats his goods.
She either explains them entirely away, or tells one everything about
them except what one wants to know.  But what did she say about Mr.
Dorian Gray?"

[8] "Oh, she murmured, 'Charming boy--poor dear mother and I quite
inseparable--engaged to be married to the same man--I mean married on
the same day--how ve