Transcribed from the 1913 Methuen and Co edition by David Price, email
ccx074@pglaf.org





                                INTENTIONS


                                    BY
                               OSCAR WILDE

                                * * * * *

                            METHUEN & CO. LTD.
                           36 ESSEX STREET W.C.
                                  LONDON

                                * * * * *

                _First Published_, _at 1s. net_, _in 1913_

                                * * * * *

_This Book was First Published_                        _1891_
_Second Edition_                                       _1894_
_First Published_ (_Third Edition_) _by Methuen        _1908_
and Co._
_Fourth Edition_                                       _1909_
_Fifth Edition_                                        _1911_

                                * * * * *

                                DEDICATED
                                    TO
                                MRS. CAREW
                                    BY
                      THE AUTHOR’S LITERARY EXECUTOR

                                * * * * *




CONTENTS

                                 PAGE
THE DECAY OF LYING                  1
PEN, PENCIL, AND POISON            57
THE CRITIC AS ARTIST               95
THE TRUTH OF MASKS                221




THE DECAY OF LYING:
AN OBSERVATION


                  _A DIALOGUE_.  _Persons_: _Cyril and_
              _Vivian_.  _Scene_: _the Library of a country_
                       _house in Nottinghamshire_.

CYRIL (_coming in through the open window from the terrace_).  My dear
Vivian, don’t coop yourself up all day in the library.  It is a perfectly
lovely afternoon.  The air is exquisite.  There is a mist upon the woods,
like the purple bloom upon a plum.  Let us go and lie on the grass and
smoke cigarettes and enjoy Nature.

VIVIAN.  Enjoy Nature!  I am glad to say that I have entirely lost that
faculty.  People tell us that Art makes us love Nature more than we loved
her before; that it reveals her secrets to us; and that after a careful
study of Corot and Constable we see things in her that had escaped our
observation.  My own experience is that the more we study Art, the less
we care for Nature.  What Art really reveals to us is Nature’s lack of
design, her curious crudities, her extraordinary monotony, her absolutely
unfinished condition.  Nature has good intentions, of course, but, as
Aristotle once said, she cannot carry them out.  When I look at a
landscape I cannot help seeing all its defects.  It is fortunate for us,
however, that Nature is so imperfect, as otherwise we should have no art
at all.  Art is our spirited protest, our gallant attempt to teach Nature
her proper place.  As for the infinite variety of Nature, that is a pure
myth.  It is not to be found in Nature herself.  It resides in the
imagination, or fancy, or cultivated blindness of the man who looks at
her.

CYRIL.  Well, you need not look at the landscape.  You can lie on the
grass and smoke and talk.

VIVIAN.  But Nature is so uncomfortable.  Grass is hard and lumpy and
damp, and full of dreadful black insects.  Why, even Morris’s poorest
workman could make you a more comfortable seat than the whole of Nature
can.  Nature pales before the furniture of ‘the street which from Oxford
has borrowed its name,’ as the poet you love so much once vilely phrased
it.  I don’t complain.  If Nature had been comfortable, mankind would
never have invented architecture, and I prefer houses to the open air.
In a house we all feel of the proper proportions.  Everything is
subordinated to us, fashioned for our use and our pleasure.  Egotism
itself, which is so necessary to a proper sense of human dignity, is
entirely the result of indoor life.  Out of doors one becomes abstract
and impersonal.  One’s individuality absolutely leaves one.  And then
Nature is so indifferent, so unappreciative.  Whenever I am walking in
the park here, I always feel that I am no more to her than the cattle
that browse on the slope, or the burdock that blooms in the ditch.
Nothing is more evident than that Nature hates Mind.  Thinking is the
most unhealthy thing in the world, and people die of it just as they die
of any other disease.  Fortunately, in England at any rate, thought is
not catching.  Our splendid physique as a people is entirely due to our
national stupidity.  I only hope we shall be able to keep this great
historic bulwark of our happiness for many years to come; but I am afraid
that we are beginning to be over-educated; at least everybody who is
incapable of learning has taken to teaching—that is really what our
enthusiasm for education has come to.  In the meantime, you had better go
back to your wearisome uncomfortable Nature, and leave me to correct my
proofs.

CYRIL.  Writing an article!  That is not very consistent after what you
have just said.

VIVIAN.  Who wants to be consistent?  The dullard and the doctrinaire,
the tedious people who carry out their principles to the bitter end of
action, to the _reductio ad absurdum_ of practice.  Not I.  Like Emerson,
I write over the door of my library the word ‘Whim.’  Besides, my article
is really a most salutary and valuable warning.  If it is attended to,
there may be a new Renaissance of Art.

CYRIL.  What is the subject?

VIVIAN.  I intend to call it ‘The Decay of Lying: A Protest.’

CYRIL.  Lying!  I should have thought that our politicians kept up that
habit.

VIVIAN.  I assure you that they do not.  They never rise beyond the level
of misrepresentation, and actually condescend to prove, to discuss, to
argue.  How different from the temper of the true liar, with his frank,
fearless statements, his superb irresponsibility, his healthy, natural
disdain of proof of any kind!  After all, what is a fine lie?  Simply
that which is its own evidence.  If a man is sufficiently unimaginative
to produce evidence in support of a lie, he might just as well speak the
truth at once.  No, the politicians won’t do.  Something may, perhaps, be
urged on behalf of the Bar.  The mantle of the Sophist has fallen on its
members.  Their feigned ardours and unreal rhetoric are delightful.  They
can make the worse appear the better cause, as though they were fresh
from Leontine schools, and have been known to wrest from reluctant juries
triumphant verdicts of acquittal for their clients, even when those
clients, as often happens, were clearly and unmistakeably innocent.  But
they are briefed by the prosaic, and are not ashamed to appeal to
precedent.  In spite of their endeavours, the truth will out.
Newspapers, even, have degenerated.  They may now be absolutely relied
upon.  One feels it as one wades through their columns.  It is always the
unreadable that occurs.  I am afraid that there is not much to be said in
favour of either the lawyer or the journalist.  Besides, what I am
pleading for is Lying in art.  Shall I read you what I have written?  It
might do you a great deal of good.

CYRIL.  Certainly, if you give me a cigarette.  Thanks.  By the way, what
magazine do you intend it for?

VIVIAN.  For the _Retrospective Review_.  I think I told you that the
elect had revived it.

CYRIL.  Whom do you mean by ‘the elect’?

VIVIAN.  Oh, The Tired Hedonists, of course.  It is a club to which I
belong.  We are supposed to wear faded roses in our button-holes when we
meet, and to have a sort of cult for Domitian.  I am afraid you are not
eligible.  You are too fond of simple pleasures.

CYRIL.  I should be black-balled on the ground of animal spirits, I
suppose?

VIVIAN.  Probably.  Besides, you are a little too old.  We don’t admit
anybody who is of the usual age.

CYRIL.  Well, I should fancy you are all a good deal bored with each
other.

VIVIAN.  We are.  This is one of the objects of the club.  Now, if you
promise not to interrupt too often, I will read you my article.

CYRIL.  You will find me all attention.

VIVIAN (_reading in a very clear_, _musical voice_).  THE DECAY OF LYING:
A PROTEST.—One of the chief causes that can be assigned for the curiously
commonplace character of most of the literature of our age is undoubtedly
the decay of Lying as an art, a science, and a social pleasure.  The
ancient historians gave us delightful fiction in the form of fact; the
modern novelist presents us with dull facts under the guise of fiction.
The Blue-Book is rapidly becoming his ideal both for method and manner.
He has his tedious _document humain_, his miserable little _coin de la
création_, into which he peers with his microscope.  He is to be found at
the Librairie Nationale, or at the British Museum, shamelessly reading up
his subject.  He has not even the courage of other people’s ideas, but
insists on going directly to life for everything, and ultimately, between
encyclopædias and personal experience, he comes to the ground, having
drawn his types from the family circle or from the weekly washerwoman,
and having acquired an amount of useful information from which never,
even in his most meditative moments, can he thoroughly free himself.

‘The lose that results to literature in general from this false ideal of
our time can hardly be overestimated.  People have a careless way of
talking about a “born liar,” just as they talk about a “born poet.”  But
in both cases they are wrong.  Lying and poetry are arts—arts, as Pinto
saw, not unconnected with each other—and they require the most careful
study, the most disinterested devotion.  Indeed, they have their
technique, just as the more material arts of painting and sculpture have,
their subtle secrets of form and colour, their craft-mysteries, their
deliberate artistic methods.  As one knows the poet by his fine music, so
one can recognise the liar by his rich rhythmic utterance, and in neither
case will the casual inspiration of the moment suffice.  Here, as
elsewhere, practice must, precede perfection.  But in modern days while
the fashion of writing poetry has become far too common, and should, if
possible, be discouraged, the fashion of lying has almost fallen into
disrepute.  Many a young man starts in life with a natural gift for
exaggeration which, if nurtured in congenial and sympathetic
surroundings, or by the imitation of the best models, might grow into
something really great and wonderful.  But, as a rule, he comes to
nothing.  He either falls into careless habits of accuracy—’

CYRIL.  My dear fellow!

VIVIAN.  Please don’t interrupt in the middle of a sentence.  ‘He either
falls into careless habits of accuracy, or takes to frequenting the
society of the aged and the well-informed.  Both things are equally fatal
to his imagination, as indeed they would be fatal to the imagination of
anybody, and in a short time he develops a morbid and unhealthy faculty
of truth-telling, begins to verify all statements made in his presence,
has no hesitation in contradicting people who are much younger than
himself, and often ends by writing novels which are so lifelike that no
one can possibly believe in their probability.  This is no isolated
instance that we are giving.  It is simply one example out of many; and
if something cannot be done to check, or at least to modify, our
monstrous worship of facts, Art will become sterile, and beauty will pass
away from the land.

‘Even Mr. Robert Louis Stevenson, that delightful master of delicate and
fanciful prose, is tainted with this modern vice, for we know positively
no other name for it.  There is such a thing as robbing a story of its
reality by trying to make it too true, and _The Black Arrow_ is so
inartistic as not to contain a single anachronism to boast of, while the
transformation of Dr. Jekyll reads dangerously like an experiment out of
the _Lancet_.  As for Mr. Rider Haggard, who really has, or had once, the
makings of a perfectly magnificent liar, he is now so afraid of being
suspected of genius that when he does tell us anything marvellous, he
feels bound to invent a personal reminiscence, and to put it into a
footnote as a kind of cowardly corroboration.  Nor are our other
novelists much better.  Mr. Henry James writes fiction as if it were a
painful duty, and wastes upon mean motives and imperceptible “points of
view” his neat literary style, his felicitous phrases, his swift and
caustic satire.  Mr. Hall Caine, it is true, aims at the grandiose, but
then he writes at the top of his voice.  He is so loud that one cannot
bear what he says.  Mr. James Payn is an adept in the art of concealing
what is not worth finding.  He hunts down the obvious with the enthusiasm
of a short-sighted detective.  As one turns over the pages, the suspense
of the author becomes almost unbearable.  The horses of Mr. William
Black’s phaeton do not soar towards the sun.  They merely frighten the
sky at evening into violent chromolithographic effects.  On seeing them
approach, the peasants take refuge in dialect.  Mrs. Oliphant prattles
pleasantly about curates, lawn-tennis parties, domesticity, and other
wearisome things.  Mr. Marion Crawford has immolated himself upon the
altar of local colour.  He is like the lady in the French comedy who
keeps talking about “le beau ciel d’Italie.”  Besides, he has fallen into
the bad habit of uttering moral platitudes.  He is always telling us that
to be good is to be good, and that to be bad is to be wicked.  At times
he is almost edifying.  _Robert Elsmere_ is of course a masterpiece—a
masterpiece of the “genre ennuyeux,” the one form of literature that the
English people seems thoroughly to enjoy.  A thoughtful young friend of
ours once told us that it reminded him of the sort of conversation that
goes on at a meat tea in the house of a serious Nonconformist family, and
we can quite believe it.  Indeed it is only in England that such a book
could be produced.  England is the home of lost ideas.  As for that great
and daily increasing school of novelists for whom the sun always rises in
the East-End, the only thing that can be said about them is that they
find life crude, and leave it raw.

‘In France, though nothing so deliberately tedious as _Robert Elsmere_
has been produced, things are not much better.  M. Guy de Maupassant,
with his keen mordant irony and his hard vivid style, strips life of the
few poor rags that still cover her, and shows us foul sore and festering
wound.  He writes lurid little tragedies in which everybody is
ridiculous; bitter comedies at which one cannot laugh for very tears.  M.
Zola, true to the lofty principle that he lays down in one of his
pronunciamientos on literature, “L’homme de génie n’a jamais d’esprit,”
is determined to show that, if he has n