“_Familiar in their Mouths as HOUSEHOLD WORDS._”—+Shakespeare.+

                            HOUSEHOLD WORDS.

                           A WEEKLY JOURNAL.

                     CONDUCTED BY CHARLES DICKENS.

       N^o. 2.]      SATURDAY, APRIL 6, 1850.      [+Price+ 2_d._




                       A CHILD’S DREAM OF A STAR.


There was once a child, and he strolled about a good deal, and thought
of a number of things. He had a sister, who was a child too, and
his constant companion. These two used to wonder all day long. They
wondered at the beauty of the flowers; they wondered at the height and
blueness of the sky; they wondered at the depth of the bright water;
they wondered at the goodness and the power of +God+ who made the
lovely world.

They used to say to one another, sometimes, Supposing all the children
upon earth were to die, would the flowers, and the water, and the sky,
be sorry? They believed they would be sorry. For, said they, the buds
are the children of the flowers, and the little playful streams that
gambol down the hill-sides are the children of the water; and the
smallest bright specks, playing at hide and seek in the sky all night,
must surely be the children of the stars; and they would all be grieved
to see their playmates, the children of men, no more.

There was one clear shining star that used to come out in the sky
before the rest, near the church spire, above the graves. It was larger
and more beautiful, they thought, than all the others, and every night
they watched for it, standing hand in hand at a window. Whoever saw
it first, cried out, “I see the star!” And often they cried out both
together, knowing so well when it would rise, and where. So they grew
to be such friends with it, that, before lying down in their beds, they
always looked out once again, to bid it good night; and when they were
turning round to sleep, they used to say, “God bless the star!”

But while she was still very young, oh very very young, the sister
drooped, and came to be so weak that she could no longer stand in the
window at night; and then the child looked sadly out by himself, and
when he saw the star, turned round and said to the patient pale face on
the bed, “I see the star!” and then a smile would come upon the face,
and a little weak voice used to say, “God bless my brother and the
star!”

And so the time came, all too soon! when the child looked out alone,
and when there was no face on the bed; and when there was a little
grave among the graves, not there before; and when the star made long
rays down towards him, as he saw it through his tears.

Now, these rays were so bright, and they seemed to make such a shining
way from earth to Heaven, that when the child went to his solitary bed,
he dreamed about the star; and dreamed that, lying where he was, he saw
a train of people taken up that sparkling road by angels. And the star,
opening, showed him a great world of light, where many more such angels
waited to receive them.

All these angels, who were waiting, turned their beaming eyes upon the
people who were carried up into the star; and some came out from the
long rows in which they stood, and fell upon the people’s necks, and
kissed them tenderly, and went away with them down avenues of light,
and were so happy in their company, that lying in his bed he wept for
joy.

But, there were many angels who did not go with them, and among them
one he knew. The patient face that once had lain upon the bed was
glorified and radiant, but his heart found out his sister among all the
host.

His sister’s angel lingered near the entrance of the star, and said to
the leader among those who had brought the people thither:

“Is my brother come?”

And he said “No.”

She was turning hopefully away, when the child stretched out his arms,
and cried “O, sister, I am here! Take me!” and then she turned her
beaming eyes upon him, and it was night; and the star was shining into
the room, making long rays down towards him as he saw it through his
tears.

From that hour forth, the child looked out upon the star as on the Home
he was to go to, when his time should come; and he thought that he did
not belong to the earth alone, but to the star too, because of his
sister’s angel gone before.

There was a baby born to be a brother to the child; and while he was so
little that he never yet had spoken word, he stretched his tiny form
out on his bed, and died.

Again the child dreamed of the opened star, and of the company of
angels, and the train of people, and the rows of angels with their
beaming eyes all turned upon those people’s faces.

Said his sister’s angel to the leader:

“Is my brother come?”

And he said “Not that one, but another.”

As the child beheld his brother’s angel in her arms, he cried, “O,
sister, I am here! Take me!” And she turned and smiled upon him, and
the star was shining.

He grew to be a young man, and was busy at his books, when an old
servant came to him, and said:

“Thy mother is no more. I bring her blessing on her darling son!”

Again at night he saw the star, and all that former company. Said his
sister’s angel to the leader:

“Is my brother come?”

And he said, “Thy mother!”

A mighty cry of joy went forth through all the star, because the mother
was re-united to her two children. And he stretched out his arms and
cried, “O, mother, sister, and brother, I am here! Take me!” And they
answered him “Not yet,” and the star was shining.

He grew to be a man, whose hair was turning grey, and he was sitting in
his chair by the fireside, heavy with grief, and with his face bedewed
with tears, when the star opened once again.

Said his sister’s angel to the leader, “Is my brother come?”

And he said, “Nay, but his maiden daughter.”

And the man who had been the child saw his daughter, newly lost to him,
a celestial creature among those three, and he said “My daughter’s head
is on my sister’s bosom, and her arm is round my mother’s neck, and at
her feet there is the baby of old time, and I can bear the parting from
her, God be praised!”

And the star was shining.

Thus the child came to be an old man, and his once smooth face was
wrinkled, and his steps were slow and feeble, and his back was bent.
And one night as he lay upon his bed, his children standing round, he
cried, as he had cried so long ago:

“I see the star!”

They whispered one another “He is dying.”

And he said, “I am. My age is falling from me like a garment, and I
move towards the star as a child. And O, my Father, now I thank thee
that it has so often opened, to receive those dear ones who await me!”

And the star was shining; and it shines upon his grave.




                     THE TRUE STORY OF A COAL FIRE.


                     IN THREE CHAPTERS.—CHAPTER I.

One winter’s evening, when the snow lay as thick as a great feather-bed
all over the garden, and was knee-deep in the meadow-hollows, a
family circle sat round a huge fire, piled up with blocks of coal of
that magnitude and profusion which are only seen at houses in the
neighbourhood of a coal-mine. It appeared as if a tram-waggon had been
‘backed’ into the room, and half its load of great loose coal shot out
into the enormous aperture in the wall which lies below the chimney and
behind the fire-place in these rural abodes. The red flames roared, and
the ale went round.

The master of the house was not exactly a farmer, but one of those
country personages who fill up the interval between the thorough farmer
and the ’squire who farms his own estate,—a sort of leather-legged,
nail-shoed old gentleman, whose elder sons might easily be mistaken
for gamekeepers, and the younger for ploughboys, but who on Sundays
took care to ‘let un see the difference’ at church. Their father was
therefore never called Farmer Dalton, but old Mr. Dalton, and almost
as frequently Billy-Pit Dalton—the coal-mine in which he held a share
being named the ‘William Pitt.’ His lands, however, were but a small
matter; his chief property was a third share he had in this coal-mine,
which was some half a mile distant from the house. His eldest son
was married, and lived close to the mine, of which he acted as the
chartermaster, or contractor with proprietors for the work to be done.

Among the family group that encircled the huge coal fire was one
visitor,—a young man from London, the nephew of old Dalton. He had
been sent down to this remote coal country by his father, in order to
separate him from associates who dissipated his time, and from pursuits
and habits that prevented his mind settling to any fixed occupation
and course of life. Flashley was a young man of kindly feelings and
good natural abilities, both of which, however, were in danger of being
spoiled.

Various efforts were made from time to time to amuse the dashing young
fellow ‘from town.’ Sometimes the old gentleman related the wonders of
the coal-mines, and the perilous adventures of the miners; and on more
than one occasion the curate of the village endeavoured to interest him
in the grand history of the early world, and especially of the period
of antediluvian forests, and their various transmutations. All in vain.
He paid no attention to them. If anything they said made any impression
at all, it was solely due to the subtle texture of the human mind,
which continually receives much more than it seeks, or has wit enough
to desire.

‘You don’t find the coal countries quite so bright and merry as London
town, do ye, Flashley?’ said old Dalton, with a good-natured smile.

‘I can’t say I do, uncle,’ answered the youth, frankly. ‘As to
merriment, that is all very well at the present moment, in front of
that great family bonfire; but all the rest of the day—’ and here
Flashley laughed with easy impudence and no small fun; ‘the house
and garden are in a state of dingy mourning, so are all the roads,
and lanes, and hedges,—in fact, the passage of lines of little black
waggons to and fro, rumbling full of coals, or rattling by, empty,
seems like the chief business of life, and the main purpose for which
men came into the world.’

‘And so they be!’ ejaculated old Dalton, jocosely; ‘so far as these
parts are concerned. You know, Flashley, the world is made up of many
parts, and this be the coal part. We be the men born to do the world’s
work of this sort; and we can’t very handsomely pass all our time
a-sitting before a shiny fire, and drinking ale,—though, that’s good o’
nights, after the work’s done.’

With this laconic homily, old Billy-Pitt Dalton rose smiling from his
chair, emptied his mug of ale, and, shaking the young man kindly by
the hand, trudged off to bed. With much the same sort of smiling ‘good
night,’ the sons all trudged after him. The good dame and her daughter
went last. Flashley remained sitting alone in front of the great fire.

He sat in silence for a long time, watching the fire decline into
great dark chasms, black holes, and rugged red precipices, with grim
smouldering chaotic heaps below.

A word or two about this young man. Flashley Dalton had some education,
which he fancied was quite enough, and was very ambitious without any
definite object. His father had proposed several professions to him,
but none of them suited him, chiefly because, to acquire eminence
in any of them, so long a time was needed. Besides, none seemed
adequate to satisfy his craving for distinction. He looked down rather
contemptuously on all ordinary pursuits. The fact was, he ardently
desired fame and fortune, but did not like to work for either. One
of the greatest injuries his mind had sustained, was from a certain
species of ‘fast literature,’ which the evil spirit of town-life has
squirted into the brains of our young men during the last three or four
years, whereby he had been taught and encouraged to laugh at everything
of serious interest, and to seek to find something ridiculous in all
ennobling efforts. If a great thing was done, he endeavoured to prove
it a little one; if a profound truth was enunciated, he sought to
make it out a lie; to him a new discovery in science was a humbug; a
generous effort, a job. If he went to see an exhibition of pictures, it
was to sneer at the most original designs; if to see a new tragedy, it
was only in the hope of its being damned. If a new work of fiction were
admirable, he talked spitefully of it, or with supercilious patronage;
and as to a noble poem, he scoffed at all such things with some slang
joke at ‘high art;’ besides, he _wrote_ himself, as many a young blade
now attempts to do, instead of beginning with a little study and some
decent reading. To Flashley all knowledge was a sort of absurdity; his
own arrogant folly seemed so much better a thing. He therefore only
read books that were like himself, and encouraged him to grow worse.
The literature of indiscriminate and reckless ridicule and burlesque
had taught him to have no faith in any sincere thing, no respect for
true knowledge; and this had well-nigh destroyed all good in his mind
and nature, as it unfortunately has done with too many others of his
age at the present day.

After sitting silently in front of the fire for some half an hour,
Flashley gradually fell into a sort of soliloquy, partaking in about
equal degrees of the grumbling, the self-conceited, the humorous, and
the drowsy.

‘So, they’re all snoring soundly by this time—all the clodpole Billy
Pittites. Uncle’s a fine old fellow. Very fond of _him_. As for all the
rest!—Wonder why the mine was called the William Pitt? Because it is so
black and deep, I suppose. Before _my_ time. Who cares for him now, or
for any of the bygones! Why should we care for anybody who went before
us? The past ones give place to the fast ones. That’s _my_ feather.

‘But a pretty mess I’ve made of my affairs in London! My father
does not know of half my debts. Hardly know of half of them myself.
Incontinent contractions. Tavern bills, sixty or seventy pounds—maybe
a hundred. Tailors? can’t calculate. Saloons and night-larks, owing
for—don’t know how much, besides money paid. Money borrowed, eighty or
ninety pounds. Books—forget—say sixpence. Like Falstaff’s ha’pennyworth
of bread to all that quantity of sack! Think I paid ready money for all
the light reading, and young gent’s books.’

The fire sank lower and lower, and so did the candles, one of which had
just gone out, and began to send up a curdling stream of yellow smoke.

‘What a place this is for coals. What a smutty face Nature wears! From
the house upwards, all alike,—dull, dusky, and detestable. Pfeu! Smell
of fried mutton fat! Now, then, old Coal fire, hold up your head. I’m
sleepy myself. This house is more like a hearse than a dwelling-place
for 