[Picture: Book cover]





                             SONNETS FROM THE
                                PORTUGUESE


                                * * * * *

                                    BY
                                ELIZABETH
                             BARRETT BROWNING

                                * * * * *

                      [Picture: Decorative graphic]

                      THE CARADOC PRESS BEDFORD PARK
                   CHISWICK LONDON             MDCCCCVI




INDEX OF FIRST LINES

          I  I thought once how Theocritus had sung
         II  But only three in all God’s universe
        III  Unlike are we, unlike, O princely Heart!
         IV  Thou hast thy calling to some palace-floor
          V  I lift my heavy heart up solemnly
         VI  Go from me.  Yet I feel that I shall stand
        VII  The face of all the world is changed, I think
       VIII  What can I give thee back, O liberal
         IX  Can it be right to give what I can give?
          X  Yet, love, mere love, is beautiful indeed
         XI  And therefore if to love can be desert
        XII  Indeed this very love which is my boast
       XIII  And wilt thou have me fashion into speech
        XIV  If thou must love me, let it be for nought
         XV  Accuse me not, beseech thee, that I wear
        XVI  And yet, because thou overcomest so
       XVII  My poet thou canst touch on all the notes
      XVIII  I never gave a lock of hair away
        XIX  The soul’s Rialto hath its merchandize
         XX  Beloved, my beloved, when I think
        XXI  Say over again, and yet once over again
       XXII  When our two souls stand up erect and strong
      XXIII  Is it indeed so?  If I lay here dead
       XXIV  Let the world’s sharpness like a clasping knife
        XXV  A heavy heart, Beloved, have I borne
       XXVI  I lived with visions for my company
      XXVII  My own Beloved, who hast lifted me
     XXVIII  My letters! all dead paper, mute and white!
       XXIX  I think of thee!—my thoughts do twine and bud
        XXX  I see thine image through my tears to-night
       XXXI  Thou comest! all is said without a word
      XXXII  The first time that the sun rose on thine oath
     XXXIII  Yes, call me by my pet-name! let me hear
      XXXIV  With the same heart, I said, I’ll answer thee
       XXXV  If I leave all for thee, wilt thou exchange
      XXXVI  When we met first and loved, I did not build
     XXXVII  Pardon, oh, pardon, that my soul should make
    XXXVIII  First time he kissed me, he but only kissed
      XXXIX  Because thou hast the power and own’st the grace
         XL  Oh, yes! they love through all this world of ours!
        XLI  I thank all who have loved me in their hearts
       XLII  My future will not copy fair my past
      XLIII  How do I love thee?  Let me count the ways
       XLIV  Beloved, thou hast brought me many flowers




I


   I thought once how Theocritus had sung
   Of the sweet years, the dear and wished-for years,
   Who each one in a gracious hand appears
   To bear a gift for mortals, old or young:
   And, as I mused it in his antique tongue,
   I saw, in gradual vision through my tears,
   The sweet, sad years, the melancholy years,
   Those of my own life, who by turns had flung
   A shadow across me.  Straightway I was ’ware,
   So weeping, how a mystic Shape did move
   Behind me, and drew me backward by the hair;
   And a voice said in mastery, while I strove,—
   “Guess now who holds thee!”—“Death,” I said, But, there,
   The silver answer rang, “Not Death, but Love.”




II


   But only three in all God’s universe
   Have heard this word thou hast said,—Himself, beside
   Thee speaking, and me listening! and replied
   One of us . . . that was God, . . . and laid the curse
   So darkly on my eyelids, as to amerce
   My sight from seeing thee,—that if I had died,
   The death-weights, placed there, would have signified
   Less absolute exclusion.  “Nay” is worse
   From God than from all others, O my friend!
   Men could not part us with their worldly jars,
   Nor the seas change us, nor the tempests bend;
   Our hands would touch for all the mountain-bars:
   And, heaven being rolled between us at the end,
   We should but vow the faster for the stars.




III


   Unlike are we, unlike, O princely Heart!
   Unlike our uses and our destinies.
   Our ministering two angels look surprise
   On one another, as they strike athwart
   Their wings in passing.  Thou, bethink thee, art
   A guest for queens to social pageantries,
   With gages from a hundred brighter eyes
   Than tears even can make mine, to ply thy part
   Of chief musician.  What hast thou to do
   With looking from the lattice-lights at me,
   A poor, tired, wandering singer, singing through
   The dark, and leaning up a cypress tree?
   The chrism is on thine head,—on mine, the dew,—
   And Death must dig the level where these agree.




IV


   Thou hast thy calling to some palace-floor,
   Most gracious singer of high poems! where
   The dancers will break footing, from the care
   Of watching up thy pregnant lips for more.
   And dost thou lift this house’s latch too poor
   For hand of thine? and canst thou think and bear
   To let thy music drop here unaware
   In folds of golden fulness at my door?
   Look up and see the casement broken in,
   The bats and owlets builders in the roof!
   My cricket chirps against thy mandolin.
   Hush, call no echo up in further proof
   Of desolation! there’s a voice within
   That weeps . . . as thou must sing . . . alone, aloof.




V


   I lift my heavy heart up solemnly,
   As once Electra her sepulchral urn,
   And, looking in thine eyes, I over-turn
   The ashes at thy feet.  Behold and see
   What a great heap of grief lay hid in me,
   And how the red wild sparkles dimly burn
   Through the ashen greyness.  If thy foot in scorn
   Could tread them out to darkness utterly,
   It might be well perhaps.  But if instead
   Thou wait beside me for the wind to blow
   The grey dust up, . . . those laurels on thine head,
   O my Belovëd, will not shield thee so,
   That none of all the fires shall scorch and shred
   The hair beneath.  Stand further off then! go!




VI


   Go from me.  Yet I feel that I shall stand
   Henceforward in thy shadow.  Nevermore
   Alone upon the threshold of my door
   Of individual life, I shall command
   The uses of my soul, nor lift my hand
   Serenely in the sunshine as before,
   Without the sense of that which I forbore—
   Thy touch upon the palm.  The widest land
   Doom takes to part us, leaves thy heart in mine
   With pulses that beat double.  What I do
   And what I dream include thee, as the wine
   Must taste of its own grapes.  And when I sue
   God for myself, He hears that name of thine,
   And sees within my eyes the tears of two.




VII


   The face of all the world is changed, I think,
   Since first I heard the footsteps of thy soul
   Move still, oh, still, beside me, as they stole
   Betwixt me and the dreadful outer brink
   Of obvious death, where I, who thought to sink,
   Was caught up into love, and taught the whole
   Of life in a new rhythm.  The cup of dole
   God gave for baptism, I am fain to drink,
   And praise its sweetness, Sweet, with thee anear.
   The names of country, heaven, are changed away
   For where thou art or shalt be, there or here;
   And this . . . this lute and song . . . loved yesterday,
   (The singing angels know) are only dear
   Because thy name moves right in what they say.




VIII


   What can I give thee back, O liberal
   And princely giver, who hast brought the gold
   And purple of thine heart, unstained, untold,
   And laid them on the outside of the wall
   For such as I to take or leave withal,
   In unexpected largesse? am I cold,
   Ungrateful, that for these most manifold
   High gifts, I render nothing back at all?
   Not so; not cold,—but very poor instead.
   Ask God who knows.  For frequent tears have run
   The colours from my life, and left so dead
   And pale a stuff, it were not fitly done
   To give the same as pillow to thy head.
   Go farther! let it serve to trample on.




IX


   Can it be right to give what I can give?
   To let thee sit beneath the fall of tears
   As salt as mine, and hear the sighing years
   Re-sighing on my lips renunciative
   Through those infrequent smiles which fail to live
   For all thy adjurations?  O my fears,
   That this can scarce be right!  We are not peers
   So to be lovers; and I own, and grieve,
   That givers of such gifts as mine are, must
   Be counted with the ungenerous.  Out, alas!
   I will not soil thy purple with my dust,
   Nor breathe my poison on thy Venice-glass,
   Nor give thee any love—which were unjust.
   Beloved, I only love thee! let it pass.




X


   Yet, love, mere love, is beautiful indeed
   And worthy of acceptation.  Fire is bright,
   Let temple burn, or flax; an equal light
   Leaps in the flame from cedar-plank or weed:
   And love is fire.  And when I say at need
   I love thee . . . mark! . . . I love thee—in thy sight
   I stand transfigured, glorified aright,
   With conscience of the new rays that proceed
   Out of my face toward thine.  There’s nothing low
   In love, when love the lowest: meanest creatures
   Who love God, God accepts while loving so.
   And what I feel, across the inferior features
   Of what I am, doth flash itself, and show
   How that great work of Love enhances Nature’s.




XI


   And therefore if to love can be desert,
   I am not all unworthy.  Cheeks as pale
   As these you see, and trembling knees that fail
   To bear the burden of a heavy heart,—
   This weary minstrel-life that once was girt
   To climb Aornus, and can scarce avail
   To pipe now ’gainst the valley nightingale
   A melancholy music,—why advert
   To these things?  O Belovëd, it is plain
   I am not of thy worth nor for thy place!
   And yet, because I love thee, I obtain
   From that same love this vindicating grace
   To live on still in love, and yet in vain,—
   To bless thee, yet renounce thee to thy face.




XII


   Indeed this very love which is my boast,
   And which, when rising up from breast to brow,
   Doth crown me with a ruby large enow
   To draw men’s eyes and prove the inner cost,—
   This love even, all my worth, to the uttermost,
   I should not love withal, unless that thou
   Hadst set me an example, shown me how,
   When first thine earnest eyes with mine were crossed,
   And love called love.  And thus, I cannot speak
   Of love even, as a good thing of my own:
   Thy soul hath snatched up mine all faint and weak,
   And placed it by thee on a golden throne,—
   And that I love (O soul, we must be meek!)
   Is by thee only, whom I love alone.




XIII


   And wilt thou have me fashion into speech
   The love I bear thee, finding words enough,
   And hold the torch out, while the winds are rough,
   Between our faces, to cast light on each?—
   I drop it at thy feet.  I cannot teach
   My hand to hold my spirits so far off
   From myself—me—that I should bring thee proof
   In words, of love hid in me out of reach.
   Nay, let the silence of my womanhood
   Commend my woman-love to thy belief,—
   Seeing that I stand unwon, however wooed,
   And rend the garment of my life, in brief,
   By a most dauntless, voiceless fortitude,
   Lest one touch of this heart convey its grief.




XIV


   If thou must love me, let it be for nought
   Except for love’s sake only.  Do not say
   “I love her for her smile—her look—her way
   Of speaking gently,—for a trick of thought
   That falls in well with mine, and certes brought
   A sense of pleasant ease on such a day”—
   For these things in themselves, Belovëd, may
   Be changed, or change for thee,—and love, so wrought,
   May be unwrought so.  Neither love me for
   Thine own dear pity’s wiping my cheeks dry,—
   A creature might forget to weep, who bore
   Thy comfort long, and lose thy love thereby!
   But love me for love’s sake, that evermore
   Thou may’st love on, through love’s eternity.




XV


   Accuse me not, beseech thee, that I wear
   Too calm and sad a face in front of thine;
   For we two look two ways, and cannot shine
   With the same sunlight on our brow and hair.
   On me thou lookest with no doubting care,
   As on a bee shut in a crystalline;
   Since sorrow hath shut me safe in love’s divine,
   And to spread wing and fly in the outer air
   Were most impossible failure, if I strove
   To fail so.  But I look on thee—on thee—
   Beholding, besides love, the end of love,
   Hearing oblivion beyond memory;
   As one who sits and gazes from above,
   Over the rivers to the bitter sea.




XVI


   And yet, because thou overcomest so,
   Because thou art more noble and like a king,
   Thou canst prevail against my fears and fling
   Thy purple round me, till my heart shall grow
   Too close against thine heart henceforth to know
   How it shook when alone.  Why, conquering
   May prove as lordly and complete a thing
   In lifting upward, as in crushing low!
   And as a vanquished soldier yields his sword
   To one who lifts him from the bloody earth,
   Even so, Belovëd, I at last record,
   Here ends my strife.  If thou invite me forth,
   I rise above abasement at the word.
   Make thy love larger to enlarge my worth!




XVII


   My poet, thou canst touch on all the notes
   God set between His After and Before,
   And strike up and strike off the general roar
   Of the rushing worlds a melody that floats
   In a serene air purely.  Antidotes
   Of medicated music, answering for
   Mankind’s forlornest uses, thou canst pour
   From thence into their ears.  God’s will devotes
   Thine to such ends, and mine to wait on thine.
   How, Dearest, wilt thou have me for most use?
   A hope, to sing by gladly? or a fine
   Sad memory, with thy songs to interfuse?
   A shade, in which to sing—of palm or pine?
   A grave, on which to rest from singing?  Choose.




XVIII


   I never gave a lock of hair away
   To a man, Dearest, except this to thee,
   Which now upon my fingers thoughtfully
   I ring out to the full brown length and say
   “Take it.”  My day of youth went yesterday;
   My hair no longer bounds to my foot’s glee,
   Nor plant I it from rose- or myrtle-tree,
   As girls do, any more: it only may
   Now shade on two pale cheeks the mark of tears,
   Taught drooping from the head that hangs aside
   Through sorrow’s trick.  