LADY SUSAN

by Jane Austen




CONTENTS

 I
 II
 III
 IV
 V
 VI
 VII
 VIII
 IX
 X
 XI
 XII
 XIII
 XIV
 XV
 XVI
 XVII
 XVIII
 XIX
 XX
 XXI
 XXII
 XXIII
 XXIV
 XXV
 XXVI
 XXVII
 XXVIII
 XXIX
 XXX
 XXXI
 XXXII
 XXXIII
 XXXIV
 XXXV
 XXXVI
 XXXVII
 XXXVIII
 XXXIX
 XL
 XLI
 CONCLUSION




I


_Lady Susan Vernon to Mr. Vernon._


Langford, Dec.


MY DEAR BROTHER,—I can no longer refuse myself the pleasure of
profiting by your kind invitation when we last parted of spending some
weeks with you at Churchhill, and, therefore, if quite convenient to
you and Mrs. Vernon to receive me at present, I shall hope within a few
days to be introduced to a sister whom I have so long desired to be
acquainted with. My kind friends here are most affectionately urgent
with me to prolong my stay, but their hospitable and cheerful
dispositions lead them too much into society for my present situation
and state of mind; and I impatiently look forward to the hour when I
shall be admitted into your delightful retirement.

I long to be made known to your dear little children, in whose hearts I
shall be very eager to secure an interest. I shall soon have need for
all my fortitude, as I am on the point of separation from my own
daughter. The long illness of her dear father prevented my paying her
that attention which duty and affection equally dictated, and I have
too much reason to fear that the governess to whose care I consigned
her was unequal to the charge. I have therefore resolved on placing her
at one of the best private schools in town, where I shall have an
opportunity of leaving her myself in my way to you. I am determined,
you see, not to be denied admittance at Churchhill. It would indeed
give me most painful sensations to know that it were not in your power
to receive me.

Your most obliged and affectionate sister,
S. VERNON.




II


_Lady Susan Vernon to Mrs. Johnson._


Langford.


You were mistaken, my dear Alicia, in supposing me fixed at this place
for the rest of the winter: it grieves me to say how greatly you were
mistaken, for I have seldom spent three months more agreeably than
those which have just flown away. At present, nothing goes smoothly;
the females of the family are united against me. You foretold how it
would be when I first came to Langford, and Mainwaring is so uncommonly
pleasing that I was not without apprehensions for myself. I remember
saying to myself, as I drove to the house, “I like this man, pray
Heaven no harm come of it!” But I was determined to be discreet, to
bear in mind my being only four months a widow, and to be as quiet as
possible: and I have been so, my dear creature; I have admitted no
one’s attentions but Mainwaring’s. I have avoided all general
flirtation whatever; I have distinguished no creature besides, of all
the numbers resorting hither, except Sir James Martin, on whom I
bestowed a little notice, in order to detach him from Miss Mainwaring;
but, if the world could know my motive _there_ they would honour me. I
have been called an unkind mother, but it was the sacred impulse of
maternal affection, it was the advantage of my daughter that led me on;
and if that daughter were not the greatest simpleton on earth, I might
have been rewarded for my exertions as I ought.

Sir James did make proposals to me for Frederica; but Frederica, who
was born to be the torment of my life, chose to set herself so
violently against the match that I thought it better to lay aside the
scheme for the present. I have more than once repented that I did not
marry him myself; and were he but one degree less contemptibly weak I
certainly should: but I must own myself rather romantic in that
respect, and that riches only will not satisfy me. The event of all
this is very provoking: Sir James is gone, Maria highly incensed, and
Mrs. Mainwaring insupportably jealous; so jealous, in short, and so
enraged against me, that, in the fury of her temper, I should not be
surprized at her appealing to her guardian, if she had the liberty of
addressing him: but there your husband stands my friend; and the
kindest, most amiable action of his life was his throwing her off for
ever on her marriage. Keep up his resentment, therefore, I charge you.
We are now in a sad state; no house was ever more altered; the whole
party are at war, and Mainwaring scarcely dares speak to me. It is time
for me to be gone; I have therefore determined on leaving them, and
shall spend, I hope, a comfortable day with you in town within this
week. If I am as little in favour with Mr. Johnson as ever, you must
come to me at 10 Wigmore street; but I hope this may not be the case,
for as Mr. Johnson, with all his faults, is a man to whom that great
word “respectable” is always given, and I am known to be so intimate
with his wife, his slighting me has an awkward look.

I take London in my way to that insupportable spot, a country village;
for I am really going to Churchhill. Forgive me, my dear friend, it is
my last resource. Were there another place in England open to me I
would prefer it. Charles Vernon is my aversion; and I am afraid of his
wife. At Churchhill, however, I must remain till I have something
better in view. My young lady accompanies me to town, where I shall
deposit her under the care of Miss Summers, in Wigmore street, till she
becomes a little more reasonable. She will made good connections there,
as the girls are all of the best families. The price is immense, and
much beyond what I can ever attempt to pay.

Adieu, I will send you a line as soon as I arrive in town.

Yours ever,
S. VERNON.




III


_Mrs. Vernon to Lady De Courcy._


Churchhill.


My dear Mother,—I am very sorry to tell you that it will not be in our
power to keep our promise of spending our Christmas with you; and we
are prevented that happiness by a circumstance which is not likely to
make us any amends. Lady Susan, in a letter to her brother-in-law, has
declared her intention of visiting us almost immediately; and as such a
visit is in all probability merely an affair of convenience, it is
impossible to conjecture its length. I was by no means prepared for
such an event, nor can I now account for her ladyship’s conduct;
Langford appeared so exactly the place for her in every respect, as
well from the elegant and expensive style of living there, as from her
particular attachment to Mr. Mainwaring, that I was very far from
expecting so speedy a distinction, though I always imagined from her
increasing friendship for us since her husband’s death that we should,
at some future period, be obliged to receive her. Mr. Vernon, I think,
was a great deal too kind to her when he was in Staffordshire; her
behaviour to him, independent of her general character, has been so
inexcusably artful and ungenerous since our marriage was first in
agitation that no one less amiable and mild than himself could have
overlooked it all; and though, as his brother’s widow, and in narrow
circumstances, it was proper to render her pecuniary assistance, I
cannot help thinking his pressing invitation to her to visit us at
Churchhill perfectly unnecessary. Disposed, however, as he always is to
think the best of everyone, her display of grief, and professions of
regret, and general resolutions of prudence, were sufficient to soften
his heart and make him really confide in her sincerity; but, as for
myself, I am still unconvinced, and plausibly as her ladyship has now
written, I cannot make up my mind till I better understand her real
meaning in coming to us. You may guess, therefore, my dear madam, with
what feelings I look forward to her arrival. She will have occasion for
all those attractive powers for which she is celebrated to gain any
share of my regard; and I shall certainly endeavour to guard myself
against their influence, if not accompanied by something more
substantial. She expresses a most eager desire of being acquainted with
me, and makes very gracious mention of my children but I am not quite
weak enough to suppose a woman who has behaved with inattention, if not
with unkindness, to her own child, should be attached to any of mine.
Miss Vernon is to be placed at a school in London before her mother
comes to us which I am glad of, for her sake and my own. It must be to
her advantage to be separated from her mother, and a girl of sixteen
who has received so wretched an education, could not be a very
desirable companion here. Reginald has long wished, I know, to see the
captivating Lady Susan, and we shall depend on his joining our party
soon. I am glad to hear that my father continues so well; and am, with
best love, &c.,

CATHERINE VERNON.




IV


_Mr. De Courcy to Mrs. Vernon._


Parklands.


My dear Sister,—I congratulate you and Mr. Vernon on being about to
receive into your family the most accomplished coquette in England. As
a very distinguished flirt I have always been taught to consider her,
but it has lately fallen in my way to hear some particulars of her
conduct at Langford: which prove that she does not confine herself to
that sort of honest flirtation which satisfies most people, but aspires
to the more delicious gratification of making a whole family miserable.
By her behaviour to Mr. Mainwaring she gave jealousy and wretchedness
to his wife, and by her attentions to a young man previously attached
to Mr. Mainwaring’s sister deprived an amiable girl of her lover.

I learnt all this from Mr. Smith, now in this neighbourhood (I have
dined with him, at Hurst and Wilford), who is just come from Langford
where he was a fortnight with her ladyship, and who is therefore well
qualified to make the communication.

What a woman she must be! I long to see her, and shall certainly accept
your kind invitation, that I may form some idea of those bewitching
powers which can do so much—engaging at the same time, and in the same
house, the affections of two men, who were neither of them at liberty
to bestow them—and all this without the charm of youth! I am glad to
find Miss Vernon does not accompany her mother to Churchhill, as she
has not even manners to recommend her; and, according to Mr. Smith’s
account, is equally dull and proud. Where pride and stupidity unite
there can be no dissimulation worthy notice, and Miss Vernon shall be
consigned to unrelenting contempt; but by all that I can gather Lady
Susan possesses a degree of captivating deceit which it must be
pleasing to witness and detect. I shall be with you very soon, and am
ever,

Your affectionate brother,
R. DE COURCY.




V


_Lady Susan Vernon to Mrs. Johnson._


Churchhill.


I received your note, my dear Alicia, just before I left town, and
rejoice to be assured that Mr. Johnson suspected nothing of your
engagement the evening before. It is undoubtedly better to deceive him
entirely, and since he will be stubborn he must be tricked. I arrived
here in safety, and have no reason to complain of my reception from Mr.
Vernon; but I confess myself not equally satisfied with the behaviour
of his lady. She is perfectly well-bred, indeed, and has the air of a
woman of fashion, but her manners are not such as can persuade me of
her being prepossessed in my favour. I wanted her to be delighted at
seeing me. I was as amiable as possible on the occasion, but all in
vain. She does not like me. To be sure, when we consider that I _did_
take some pains to prevent my brother-in-law’s marrying her, this want
of cordiality is not very surprizing, and yet it shows an illiberal and
vindictive spirit to resent a project which influenced me six years
ago, and which never succeeded at last.

I am sometimes disposed to repent that I did not let Charles buy Vernon
Castle, when we were obliged to sell it; but it was a trying
circumstance, especially as the sale took place exactly at the time of
his marriage; and everybody ought to respect the delicacy of those
feelings which could not endure that my husband’s dignity should be
lessened by his younger brother’s having possession of the family
estate. Could matters have been so arranged as to prevent the necessity
of our leaving the castle, could we have lived with Charles and kept
him single, I should have been very far from persuading my husband to
dispose of it elsewhere; but Charles was on the point of marrying Miss
De Courcy, and the event has justified me. Here are children in
abundance, and what benefit could have accrued to me from his
purchasing Vernon? My having prevented it may perhaps have given his
wife an unfavourable impression, but where there is a disposition to
dislike, a motive will never be wanting; and as to money matters it has
not withheld him from being very useful to me. I really have a regard
for him, he is so easily imposed upon! The house is a good one, the
furniture fashionable, and everything announces plenty and elegance.
Charles is very rich I am sure; when a man has once got his name in a
banking-house he rolls in money; but they do not know what to do with
it, keep very little company, and never go to London but on business.
We shall be as stupid as possible. I mean to win my sister-in-law’s
heart through the children; I know all their names already, and am
going to attach myself with the greatest sensibility to one in
particular, a young Frederic, whom I take on my lap and sigh over for
his dear uncle’s sake.

Poor Mainwaring! I need not tell you how much I miss him, how
perpetually he is in my thoughts. I found a dismal letter from him on
my arrival here, full of complaints of his wife and sister, and
lamentations on the cruelty of his fate. I passed off the letter as his
wife’s, to the Vernons, and when I write to him it must be under cover
to you.

Ever yours,
S. VERNON.




VI


_Mrs. Vernon to Mr. De Courcy._


Churchhill.


Well, my dear Reginald, I have seen this dangerous creature, and must
give you some description of her, though I hope you will soon be able
to form your own judgment. She is really excessively pretty; however
you may choose to question the allurements of a lady no longer young, I
must, for my own part, declare that I have seldom seen so lovely a
woman as Lady Susan. She is delicately fair, with fine grey eyes and
dark eyelashes; and from her appearance one would not suppose her more
than five and twenty, though she must in fact be ten years older. I was
certainly not disposed to admire her, though always hearing she was
beautiful; but I cannot help feeling that she possesses an uncommon
union of symmetry, brilliancy, and grace. Her address to me was so
gentle, frank, and even affectionate, that, if I had not known how much
she has always disliked me for marrying Mr. Vernon, and that we