Produced by Gordon Keener








INDIA'S LOVE LYRICS

By Laurence Hope



Editorial note:  Laurence Hope was the pen name of Adela Florence Cory
Nicolson. Born in 1865, she was educated in England. At age 16 she
joined her father in India, where she spent most of her adult life. In
1889 she married Col. Malcolm H. Nicolson, a man twice her age. She
committed suicide two months after his death in 1904.






"Less than the Dust"

   Less than the dust, beneath thy Chariot wheel,
   Less than the rust, that never stained thy Sword,
   Less than the trust thou hast in me, O Lord,
                                Even less than these!

   Less than the weed, that grows beside thy door,
   Less than the speed of hours spent far from thee,
   Less than the need thou hast in life of me.
                                Even less am I.

   Since I, O Lord, am nothing unto thee,
   See here thy Sword, I make it keen and bright,
   Love's last reward, Death, comes to me to-night,
                                Farewell,  Zahir-u-din.





"To the Unattainable"

   Oh, that my blood were water, thou athirst,
   And thou and I in some far Desert land,
   How would I shed it gladly, if but first
   It touched thy lips, before it reached the sand.

   Once,--Ah, the Gods were good to me,--I threw
   Myself upon a poison snake, that crept
   Where my Beloved--a lesser love we knew
   Than this which now consumes me wholly--slept.

   But thou; Alas, what can I do for thee?
   By Fate, and thine own beauty, set above
   The need of all or any aid from me,
   Too high for service, as too far for love.






"In the Early, Pearly Morning":

   Song by Valgovind

   The fields are full of Poppies, and the skies are very blue,
   By the Temple in the coppice, I wait, Beloved, for you.
   The level land is sunny, and the errant air is gay,
   With scent of rose and honey; will you come to me to-day?

   From carven walls above me, smile lovers; many a pair.
   "Oh, take this rose and love me!" she has twined it in her hair.
   He advances, she retreating, pursues and holds her fast,
   The sculptor left them meeting, in a close embrace at last.

   Through centuries together, in the carven stone they lie,
   In the glow of golden weather, and endless azure sky.
   Oh, that we, who have for pleasure so short and scant a stay,
   Should waste our summer leisure; will you come to me to-day?

   The Temple bells are ringing, for the marriage month has come.
   I hear the women singing, and the throbbing of the drum.
   And when the song is failing, or the drums a moment mute,
   The weirdly wistful wailing of the melancholy flute.

   Little life has got to offer, and little man to lose,
   Since to-day Fate deigns to proffer, Oh wherefore, then, refuse
   To take this transient hour, in the dusky Temple gloom
   While the poppies are in flower, and the mangoe trees abloom.

   And if Fate remember later, and come to claim her due,
   What sorrow will be greater than the Joy I had with you?
   For to-day, lit by your laughter, between the crushing years,
   I will chance, in the hereafter, eternities of tears.





Reverie of Mahomed Akram at the Tamarind Tank

   The Desert is parched in the burning sun
   And the grass is scorched and white.
   But the sand is passed, and the march is done,
   We are camping here to-night.
        I sit in the shade of the Temple walls,
        While the cadenced water evenly falls,
        And a peacock out of the Jungle calls
        To another, on yonder tomb.
       Above, half seen, in the lofty gloom,
       Strange works of a long dead people loom,
   Obscene and savage and half effaced--
   An elephant hunt, a musicians' feast--
   And curious matings of man and beast;
   What did they mean to the men who are long since dust?
        Whose fingers traced,
        In this arid waste,
   These rioting, twisted, figures of love and lust.

   Strange, weird things that no man may say,
   Things Humanity hides away;--
        Secretly done,--
   Catch the light of the living day,
        Smile in the sun.
   Cruel things that man may not name,
   Naked here, without fear or shame,
        Laughed in the carven stone.

   Deep in the Temple's innermost Shrine is set,
       Where the bats and shadows dwell,
   The worn and ancient Symbol of Life, at rest
       In its oval shell,
   By which the men, who, of old, the land possessed,
   Represented their Great Destroying Power.
        I cannot forget
   That, just as my life was touching its fullest flower,
   Love came and destroyed it all in a single hour,
        Therefore the dual Mystery suits me well.

                           Sitting alone,
   The tank's deep water is cool and sweet,
   Soothing and fresh to the wayworn feet,
           Dreaming, under the Tamarind shade,
           One silently thanks the men who made
   So green a place in this bitter land
                Of sunburnt sand.

   The peacocks scream and the grey Doves coo,
   Little green, talkative Parrots woo,
   And small grey Squirrels, with fear askance,
   At alien me, in their furtive glance,
   Come shyly, with quivering fur, to see
   The stranger under their Tamarind tree.
          Daylight dies,
   The Camp fires redden like angry eyes,
          The Tents show white,
           In the glimmering light,
   Spirals of tremulous smoke arise, to the purple skies,
         And the hum of the Camp sounds like the sea,
     Drifting over the sand to me.
          Afar, in the Desert some wild voice sings
          To a jangling zither with minor strings,
            And, under the stars growing keen above,
            I think of the thing that I love.

         A beautiful thing, alert, serene,
   With passionate, dreaming, wistful eyes,
   Dark and deep as mysterious skies,
   Seen from a vessel at sea.
   Alas, you drifted away from me,
   And Time and Space have rushed in between,
   But they cannot undo the Thing-that-has-been,
               Though it never again may be.
   You were mine, from dusk until dawning light,
   For the perfect whole of that bygone night
               You belonged to me!

   They say that Love is a light thing,
   A foolish thing and a slight thing,
               A ripe fruit, rotten at core;
     They speak in this futile fashion
     To me, who am wracked with passion,
     Tormented beyond compassion,
               For ever and ever more.

   They say that Possession lessens a lover's delight,
     As radiant mornings fade into afternoon.
   I held what I loved in my arms for many a night,
     Yet ever the morning lightened the sky too soon.

   Beyond our tents the sands stretch level and far,
   Around this little oasis of Tamarind trees.
   A curious, Eastern fragrance fills the breeze
   From the ruinous Temple garden where roses are.

   I dream of the rose-like perfume that fills your hair,
   Of times when my lips were free of your soft closed eyes,
   While down in the tank the waters ripple and rise
   And the flying foxes silently cleave the air.

   The present is subtly welded into the past,
   My love of you with the purple Indian dusk,
   With its clinging scent of sandal incense and musk,
            And withering jasmin flowers.
   My eyes grow dim and my senses fail at last,
            While the lonely hours
   Follow each other, silently, one by one,
                 Till the night is almost done.

   Then weary, and drunk with dreams, with my garments damp
   And heavy with dew, I wander towards the camp.
     Tired, with a brain in which fancy and fact are blent,
     I stumble across the ropes till I reach my tent
   And then to rest. To ensweeten my sleep with lies,
   To dream I lie in the light of your long lost eyes,
                   My lips set free.
   To love and linger over your soft loose hair--
   To dream I lay your delicate beauty bare
                   To solace my fevered eyes.
   Ah,--if my life might end in a night like this--
   Drift into death from dreams of your granted kiss!






Verses

   You are my God, and I would fain adore You
     With sweet and secret rites of other days.
   Burn scented oil in silver lamps before You,
     Pour perfume on Your feet with prayer and praise.

   Yet are we one; Your gracious condescension
     Granted, and grants, the loveliness I crave.
   One, in the perfect sense of Eastern mention,
     "Gold and the Bracelet, Water and the Wave."





Song of Khan Zada

   As one may sip a Stranger's Bowl
   You gave yourself but not your soul.
   I wonder, now that time has passed,
   Where you will come to rest at last.

   You gave your beauty for an hour,
   I held it gently as a flower.
   You wished to leave me, told me so,--
   I kissed your feet and let you go.





The Teak Forest

   Whether I loved you who shall say?
   Whether I drifted down your way
   In the endless River of Chance and Change,
   And you woke the strange
   Unknown longings that have no names,
   But burn us all in their hidden flames,
             Who shall say?

   Life is a strange and a wayward thing:
   We heard the bells of the Temples ring,
   The married children, in passing, sing.
   The month of marriage, the month of spring,
   Was full of the breath of sunburnt flowers
   That bloom in a fiercer light than ours,
   And, under a sky more fiercely blue,
             I came to you!

   You told me tales of your vivid life
   Where death was cruel and danger rife--
   Of deep dark forests, of poisoned trees,
   Of pains and passions that scorch and freeze,
   Of southern noontides and eastern nights,
   Where love grew frantic with strange delights,
   While men were slaying and maidens danced,
   Till I, who listened, lay still, entranced.
   Then, swift as a swallow heading south,
             I kissed your mouth!

   One night when the plains were bathed in blood
   From sunset light in a crimson flood,
   We wandered under the young teak trees
   Whose branches whined in the light night breeze;
   You led me down to the water's brink,
   "The Spring where the Panthers come to drink
   At night; there is always water here
   Be the season never so parched and sere."
   Have we souls of beasts in the forms of men?
   I fain would have tasted your life-blood then.

   The night fell swiftly; this sudden land
   Can never lend us a twilight strand
   'Twixt the daylight shore and the ocean night,
   But takes--as it gives--at once, the light.
   We laid us down on the steep hillside,
   While far below us wild peacocks cried,
   And we sometimes heard, in the sunburnt grass,
   The stealthy steps of the Jungle pass.
   We listened; knew not whether they went
   On love or hunger the more intent.
   And under your kisses I hardly knew
   Whether I loved or hated you.

   But your words were flame and your kisses fire,
   And who shall resist a strong desire?
   Not I, whose life is a broken boat
   On a sea of passions, adrift, afloat.
   And, whether I came in love or hate,
   That I came to you was written by Fate
   In every hue of the blood-red sky,
   In every tone of the peacocks' cry.

   While every gust of the Jungle night
   Was fanning the flame you had set alight.
   For these things have power to stir the blood
   And compel us all to their own chance mood.
   And to love or not we are no more free
   Than a ripple to rise and leave the sea.

   We are ever and always slaves of these,
   Of the suns that scorch and the winds that freeze,
   Of the faint sweet scents of the sultry air,
   Of the half heard howl from the far off lair.
   These chance things master us ever.  Compel
   To the heights of Heaven, the depths of Hell.

   Whether I love you?  You do not ask,
   Nor waste yourself on the thankless task.
   I give your kisses at least return,
   What matter whether they freeze or burn.
   I feel the strength of your fervent arms,
   What matter whether it heals or harms.

   You are wise; you take what the Gods have sent.
   You ask no question, but rest content
   So I am with you to take your kiss,
   And perhaps I value you more for this.
   For this is Wisdom; to love, to live,
   To take what Fate, or the Gods, may give,
   To ask no question, to make no prayer,
   To kiss the lips and caress the hair,
   Speed passion's ebb as you greet its flow,--
   To have,--to hold,--and,--in time,--let go!

   And this is our Wisdom: we rest together
   On the great lone hills in the storm-filled weather,
   And watch the skies as they pale and burn,
   The golden stars in their orbits turn,
   While Love is with us, and Time and Peace,
   And life has nothing to give but these.
   But, whether you love me, who shall say,
   Or whether you, drifting down my way
   In the great sad River of Chance and Change,
   With your looks so weary and words so strange,
   Lit my soul from some hidden flame
   To a passionate longing without a name,
             Who shall say?
   Not I, who am but a broken boat,
   Content for a while to drift afloat
   In the little noontide of love's delights
             Between two Nights.





Valgovind's Boat Song

   Waters glisten and sunbeams quiver,
             The wind blows fresh and free.
   Take my boat to your breast, O River!
             Carry me out to Sea!

   This land is laden with fruit and grain,
             With never a place left free for flowers,
   A fruitful mother; but I am fain
             For brides in their early bridal hours.

   Take my boat to your breast, O River!
             Carry me out to Sea!

   The Sea, beloved by a thousand ships,
             Is maiden ever, and fresh and free.
   Ah, for the touch of her cool green lips,
             Carry me out to Sea!

   Take my boat to your breast, dear River,
             And carry it out to Sea!





Kashmiri Song by Juma

   You never loved me, and yet to save me,
   One unforgetable night you gave me
   Such chill embraces as the snow-covered heights
   Receive from clouds, in northern, Auroral nights.
   Such keen communion as the frozen mere
   Has with immaculate moonlight, cold and clear.
   And all desire,
   Like failing fire,
   Died slowly, faded surely, and sank to rest
   Against the delicate chillness of your breast.





Zira: in Captivity

   Love me a little, Lord, or let me go,
   I am so weary walking to and fro
   Through all your lonely halls that were so sweet
   Did they but echo to your coming feet.

   When by the flowered scrolls of lace-like stone
   Our women's windows--I am left alone,
   A