The Tenant of Wildfell Hall

by Anne Brontë

WITH AN INTRODUCTION
BY MRS HUMPHREY WARD

LONDON
JOHN MURRAY, ALBEMARLE STREET, W.
1920




Contents


This Table of Contents contains the original chapter headings that were present
in the first printed edition of 1848. These headings were removed in later
(one-volume) editions of the text, after Anne Brontë’s death in 1849.

 I. A Discovery
 II. An Interview
 III. A Controversy
 IV. The Party
 V. The Studio
 VI. Progression
 VII. The Excursion
 VIII. The Present
 IX. A Snake in the Grass
 X. A Contract and a Quarrel
 XI. The Vicar Again
 XII. A Tête-à-Tête and a Discovery
 XIII. A Return to Duty
 XIV. An Assault
 XV. An Encounter and its Consequences
 XVI. The Warnings of Experience
 XVII. Further Warnings
 XVIII. The Miniature
 XIX. An Incident
 XX. Persistence
 XXI. Opinions
 XXII. Traits of Friendship
 XXIII. First Weeks of Matrimony
 XXIV. First Quarrel
 XXV. First Absence
 XXVI. The Guests
 XXVII. A Misdemeanour
 XXVIII. Parental Feelings
 XXIX. The Neighbour
 XXX. Domestic Scenes
 XXXI. Social Virtues
 XXXII. Comparisons: Information Rejected
 XXXIII. Two Evenings
 XXXIV. Concealment
 XXXV. Provocations
 XXXVI. Dual Solitude
 XXXVII. The Neighbour Again
 XXXVIII. The Injured Man
 XXXIX. A Scheme of Escape
 XL. A Misadventure
 XLI. “Hope Springs Eternal in the Human Breast”
 XLII. A Reformation
 XLIII. The Boundary Past
 XLIV. The Retreat
 XLV. Reconciliation
 XLVI. Friendly Counsels
 XLVII. Startling Intelligence
 XLVIII. Further Intelligence
 XLIX. 
 L. Doubts and Disappointments
 LI. An Unexpected Occurrence
 LII. Fluctuations
 LIII. Conclusion


LIST OF ILLUSTRATIONS

 Portrait of Anne Brontë
 Moorland Scene, Haworth
 Moorland scene (with water): Haworth
 Moorland scene (with cottage), Haworth
 Blake Hall—The Approach (Grassdale Manor)
 Blake Hall—Front (Grassdale Manor)
 Blake Hall—Side (Grassdale Manor)

[Illustration]




INTRODUCTION


Anne Brontë serves a twofold purpose in the study of what the Brontës
wrote and were. In the first place, her gentle and delicate presence,
her sad, short story, her hard life and early death, enter deeply into
the poetry and tragedy that have always been entwined with the memory
of the Brontës, as women and as writers; in the second, the books and
poems that she wrote serve as matter of comparison by which to test the
greatness of her two sisters. She is the measure of their genius—like
them, yet not with them.

Many years after Anne’s death her brother-in-law protested against a
supposed portrait of her, as giving a totally wrong impression of the
“dear, gentle Anne Brontë.” “Dear” and “gentle” indeed she seems to
have been through life, the youngest and prettiest of the sisters, with
a delicate complexion, a slender neck, and small, pleasant features.
Notwithstanding, she possessed in full the Brontë seriousness, the
Brontë strength of will. When her father asked her at four years old
what a little child like her wanted most, the tiny creature replied—if
it were not a Brontë it would be incredible!—“Age and experience.” When
the three children started their “Island Plays” together in 1827, Anne,
who was then eight, chose Guernsey for her imaginary island, and
peopled it with “Michael Sadler, Lord Bentinck, and Sir Henry Halford.”
She and Emily were constant companions, and there is evidence that they
shared a common world of fancy from very early days to mature
womanhood. “The Gondal Chronicles” seem to have amused them for many
years, and to have branched out into innumerable books, written in the
“tiny writing” of which Mr. Clement Shorter has given us facsimiles. “I
am now engaged in writing the fourth volume of Solala Vernon’s Life,”
says Anne at twenty-one. And four years later Emily says, “The Gondals
still flourish bright as ever. I am at present writing a work on the
First War. Anne has been writing some articles on this and a book by
Henry Sophona. We intend sticking firm by the rascals as long as they
delight us, which I am glad to say they do at present.”

That the author of “Wildfell Hall” should ever have delighted in the
Gondals, should ever have written the story of Solala Vernon or Henry
Sophona, is pleasant to know. Then, for her too, as for her sisters,
there was a moment when the power of “making out” could turn loneliness
and disappointment into riches and content. For a time at least, and
before a hard and degrading experience had broken the spring of her
youth, and replaced the disinterested and spontaneous pleasure that is
to be got from the life and play of imagination, by a sad sense of
duty, and an inexorable consciousness of moral and religious mission,
Anne Brontë wrote stories for her own amusement, and loved the
“rascals” she created.

But already in 1841, when we first hear of the Gondals and Solala
Vernon, the material for quite other books was in poor Anne’s mind. She
was then teaching in the family at Thorpe Green, where Branwell joined
her as tutor in 1843, and where, owing to events that are still a
mystery, she seems to have passed through an ordeal that left her
shattered in health and nerve, with nothing gained but those melancholy
and repulsive memories that she was afterwards to embody in “Wildfell
Hall.” She seems, indeed, to have been partly the victim of Branwell’s
morbid imagination, the imagination of an opium-eater and a drunkard.
That he was neither the conqueror nor the villain that he made his
sisters believe, all the evidence that has been gathered since Mrs.
Gaskell wrote goes to show. But poor Anne believed his account of
himself, and no doubt saw enough evidence of vicious character in
Branwell’s daily life to make the worst enormities credible. She seems
to have passed the last months of her stay at Thorpe Green under a
cloud of dread and miserable suspicion, and was thankful to escape from
her situation in the summer of 1845. At the same moment Branwell was
summarily dismissed from his tutorship, his employer, Mr. Robinson,
writing a stern letter of complaint to Branwell’s father, concerned no
doubt with the young man’s disorderly and intemperate habits. Mrs.
Gaskell says: “The premature deaths of two at least of the sisters—all
the great possibilities of their earthly lives snapped short—may be
dated from Midsummer 1845.” The facts as we now know them hardly bear
out so strong a judgment. There is nothing to show that Branwell’s
conduct was responsible in any way for Emily’s illness and death, and
Anne, in the contemporary fragment recovered by Mr. Shorter, gives a
less tragic account of the matter. “During my stay (at Thorpe Green),”
she writes on July 31, 1845, “I have had some very unpleasant and
undreamt-of experience of human nature. . . . Branwell has . . . been a
tutor at Thorpe Green, and had much tribulation and ill-health. . . .
We hope he will be better and do better in future.” And at the end of
the paper she says, sadly, forecasting the coming years, “I for my part
cannot well be flatter or older in mind than I am now.” This is the
language of disappointment and anxiety; but it hardly fits the tragic
story that Mrs. Gaskell believed.

That story was, no doubt, the elaboration of Branwell’s diseased fancy
during the three years which elapsed between his dismissal from Thorpe
Green and his death. He imagined a guilty romance with himself and his
employer’s wife for characters, and he imposed the horrid story upon
his sisters. Opium and drink are the sufficient explanations; and no
time need now be wasted upon unravelling the sordid mystery. But the
vices of the brother, real or imaginary, have a certain importance in
literature, because of the effect they produced upon his sisters. There
can be no question that Branwell’s opium madness, his bouts of
drunkenness at the Black Bull, his violence at home, his free and
coarse talk, and his perpetual boast of guilty secrets, influenced the
imagination of his wholly pure and inexperienced sisters. Much of
“Wuthering Heights,” and all of “Wildfell Hall,” show Branwell’s mark,
and there are many passages in Charlotte’s books also where those who
know the history of the parsonage can hear the voice of those sharp
moral repulsions, those dismal moral questionings, to which Branwell’s
misconduct and ruin gave rise. Their brother’s fate was an element in
the genius of Emily and Charlotte which they were strong enough to
assimilate, which may have done them some harm, and weakened in them
certain delicate or sane perceptions, but was ultimately, by the
strange alchemy of talent, far more profitable than hurtful, inasmuch
as it troubled the waters of the soul, and brought them near to the
more desperate realities of our “frail, fall’n humankind.”

But Anne was not strong enough, her gift was not vigorous enough, to
enable her thus to transmute experience and grief. The probability is
that when she left Thorpe Green in 1845 she was already suffering from
that religious melancholy of which Charlotte discovered such piteous
evidence among her papers after death. It did not much affect the
writing of “Agnes Grey,” which was completed in 1846, and reflected the
minor pains and discomforts of her teaching experience, but it combined
with the spectacle of Branwell’s increasing moral and physical decay to
produce that bitter mandate of conscience under which she wrote “The
Tenant of Wildfell Hall.”

“Hers was naturally a sensitive, reserved, and dejected nature. She
hated her work, but would pursue it. It was written as a warning,”—so
said Charlotte when, in the pathetic Preface of 1850, she was
endeavouring to explain to the public how a creature so gentle and so
good as Acton Bell should have written such a book as “Wildfell Hall.”
And in the second edition of “Wildfell Hall,” which appeared in 1848,
Anne Brontë herself justified her novel in a Preface which is reprinted
in this volume for the first time. The little Preface is a curious
document. It has the same determined didactic tone which pervades the
book itself, the same narrowness of view, and inflation of expression,
an inflation which is really due not to any personal egotism in the
writer, but rather to that very gentleness and inexperience which must
yet nerve itself under the stimulus of religion to its disagreeable and
repulsive task. “I knew that such characters”—as Huntingdon and his
companions—“do exist, and if I have warned one rash youth from
following in their steps the book has not been written in vain.” If the
story has given more pain than pleasure to “any honest reader,” the
writer “craves his pardon, for such was far from my intention.” But at
the same time she cannot promise to limit her ambition to the giving of
innocent pleasure, or to the production of “a perfect work of art.”
“Time and talent so spent I should consider wasted and misapplied.” God
has given her unpalatable truths to speak, and she must speak them.

The measure of misconstruction and abuse, therefore, which her book
brought upon her she bore, says her sister, “as it was her custom to
bear whatever was unpleasant, with mild, steady patience. She was a
very sincere and practical Christian, but the tinge of religious
melancholy communicated a sad shade to her brief, blameless life.”

In spite of misconstruction and abuse, however, “Wildfell Hall” seems
to have attained more immediate success than anything else written by
the sisters before 1848, except “Jane Eyre.” It went into a second
edition within a very short time of its publication, and Messrs. Newby
informed the American publishers with whom they were negotiating that
it was the work of the same hand which had produced “Jane Eyre,” and
superior to either “Jane Eyre” or “Wuthering Heights”! It was, indeed,
the sharp practice connected with this astonishing judgment which led
to the sisters’ hurried journey to London in 1848—the famous journey
when the two little ladies in black revealed themselves to Mr. Smith,
and proved to him that they were not one Currer Bell, but two Miss
Brontës. It was Anne’s sole journey to London—her only contact with a
world that was not Haworth, except that supplied by her school-life at
Roehead and her two teaching engagements.

And there was and is a considerable narrative ability, a sheer moral
energy in “Wildfell Hall,” which would not be enough, indeed, to keep
it alive if it were not the work of a Brontë, but still betray its
kinship and source. The scenes of Huntingdon’s wickedness are less
interesting but less improbable than the country-house scenes of “Jane
Eyre”; the story of his death has many true and touching passages; the
last love-scene is well, even in parts admirably, written. But the
book’s truth, so far as it is true, is scarcely the truth of
imagination; it is rather the truth of a tract or a report. There can
be little doubt that many of the pages are close transcripts from
Branwell’s conduct and language,—so far as Anne’s slighter personality
enabled her to render her brother’s temperament, which was more akin to
Emily’s than to her own. The same material might have been used by
Emily or Charlotte; Emily, as we know, did make use of it in “Wuthering
Heights”; but only after it had passed through that ineffable
transformation, that mysterious, incommunicable heightening which makes
and gives rank in literature. Some subtle, innate correspondence
between eye and brain, between brain and hand, was present in Emily and
Charlotte, and absent in Anne. There is no other account to be given of
this or any other case of difference between serviceable talent and the
high gifts of “Delos” and Patara’s own “Apollo.”

The same world of difference appears between her poems and those of her
playfellow and comrade, Emily. If ever our descendants should establish
the schools for writers which are even now threatened or attempted,
they will hardly know perhaps any better than we what genius is, nor
how it can be produced. But if they try to teach by example, then Anne
and Emily Brontë are ready to their hand. Take the verses written by
Emily at Roehead which contain the lovely lines which I have already
quoted in an earlier “Introduction.”[1] Just before those lines there
are two or three verses which it is worth while to compare with a poem
of Anne’s called “Home.” Emily was sixteen at the time of writing; Anne
about twenty-one or twenty-two. Both sisters take for their motive the
exile’s longing thought of home. Emily’s lines are full of faults, but
they have the indefinable quality—here, no doubt, only in the bud, only
as a matter of promise—which Anne’s are entirely without. From the
twilight schoolroom at Roehead, Emily turns in thought to the distant
upland of Haworth and the little stone-built house 