Produced by Jon Richfield






EXPLANATION OF TERMS USED IN ENTOMOLOGY

PREPARED BY JOHN B. SMITH, Sc.D.
Professor of Entomology in Rutgers College, &c.

PUBLISHED BY THE BROOKLYN ENTOMOLOGICAL SOCIETY
BROOKLYN, N. Y.
1906

PRESS OF THE NEW ERA PRINTING COMPANY
LANCASTER, PA.

{Scanner's note: This book is about a century old at the time of
scanning.  I found it in the discard pile of a local university library.  I
find the book to be of exceptional historical interest in the insights it
gives into the development of early modern entomological science.  It
also is of practical value as a source for terms that are obscure to
modern users because they are no longer current.

I have edited the text as well as I could and I think it is by now very
usable, but do treat any really suspicious looking passages with
reserve.  I have avoided the use of non-alphabetic symbols as far as I
could, for example Greek letters and male, female and hermaphroditic
symbols, but if you encounter difficulties you might find the
problem there.  Also, the colour table at the end is not really much
good for anything beyond general impressions; not only are the paper
and ink old, but between my scanner and your screen or printer, there
is room for too much misinterpretation of precise colour, for anyone to
take it seriously.

In any case, enjoy.  The book is a valuable product of serious workers
in an age of exploration.}



FOREWORD.

When, some time since, in consequence of continuing demands, the
Brooklyn Entomological Society resolved to publish a new edition of
its Explanation of Terms used in Entomology, and entrusted the
writer and two associates with the task of preparing the same, it was
believed that a little revision of definitions, the dropping of a few
obsolete terms and the addition of a few lately proposed, would be all
that was necessary. It was to be a light task to fill idle time in
summer, report to be made in fall. Two years have passed since that
time; the associates have dropped by the way; the manuscript
contains five times the number of terms in the original "Explanation."
and if it is published now, it is not because I believe it to be complete;
but because I do not believe it can be made complete except as the
result of criticism and voluntary addition by specialists throughout
the country.

It is twenty-six years since the original list was published and nothing
can better illustrate the advances made than a comparison between
the old and the new Glossary. No one realizes better than I the fact
that as students have increased in each order, each has followed an
independent line of research, absolutely without regard to the work
done elsewhere. In consequence, we have several terms for the same
thing in many cases and, in an equal number, several meanings to the
same term. As no one man can now-a-days cover the entire field of
Entomology, it goes without saying that I was compelled to rely partly
upon books and partly upon the good nature of correspondents to
make the work even approximately complete.

The first notable contribution came from Professor Justus W. Folsom,
of Urbana, Illinois, who sent me over 2000 cards of terms collected by
himself and his assistants, and these added materially at the
beginning of the work.  A number of correspondents were good enough
to send in lists of terms in Coleoptera, Lepidoptera, Orthoptera,
Hemiptera and Neuroptera, and to refer me to literature where
explanations of other special terms could be found.

After the cards were so far advanced as to warrant a preliminary
manuscript, Dr. Philip P. Calvert of the University of Pennsylvania.
Mr. Nathan Banks of Washington, D.C., and Mr. C. W. Johnson of
the Boston Society of Natural History went carefully over the entire
work and by their criticisms and additions contributed materially to
such merit as it possesses. To these gentlemen and to the many
others not specifically mentioned I give thanks for their assistance,
and if there have not been more co-workers it has been only because
of the time element that seems to demand the best that is ready,
rather than a delay to secure perfection.

It would be interesting to go at length into the history of the
correspondence to determine what sort of terms should or should not
be included and to bring out the hopeless divergencies existing; but
all that is important here is to state briefly what has been included
and what omitted.

Common English terms even if descriptive, when used in their
ordinary dictionary sense, have not been included as a rule; but this
is subject to many exceptions. Latin terms and derivatives, even if
used in their usual sense have been generally included; but
compounds made up of adequately defined descriptive terms are
generally omitted. Adverbial or adjective forms have been omitted
whenever it has been considered safe, and so have terms prefixed by
sub-, supra- and the like, indicating degree or position. In doubtful
cases the terms have been included and defined. All terms of venation
are, so far as possible, reduced to the Comstock system which is the
only one that has been satisfactorily worked out for all orders, and a
series of figures is added to explain this system so far as seems
necessary. It has not been considered feasible to determine the proper
use of terms applied differently in different orders or families; that is
scarcely within the scope of a work of this kind.

Terms used in embryological and histological study have been
included only so far as seemed necessary to an understanding of the
general works, and no attempt has been made to cover the terms
applied to musculature and other details of microscopic structure:
this has seemed rather to be outside of the scope of the present essay.

All color terms are reduced so far as possible to terms of the
Windsor and Newton system of water colors which are standard in the
English-speaking world, and the color plate shows solid blocks of
those colors that seem necessary to explain all modifications except
metallics, blacks and whites. {Scanner's note: color plate may be
excluded, partly because it is in poor condition.}

The figures illustrating body structures and other details have been
drawn under my supervision by Mr. John A. Grossbeck, and are
meant to be guides merely - else the glossary would exceed its scope.

In the admission that the work is incomplete, no apology is intended
for its publication; it is merely a statement of fact to encourage
constructive rather than destructive criticism. It is hoped that those
who note errors or omissions will communicate them to the writer so
that when another edition is needed, as it will be before many years
are past, a standard work may be possible.



JOHN B. SMITH, Sc.D.

New Brunswick,  N.J.  April 1906




EXPLANATORY.

Definitions of general application are as a rule given first, where
more than one is necessary; next those of limited use, and finally
the specific meaning in each order in which there is any notable
difference.

Where a word has more than one ending, the difference is given after a
hyphen which represents the stem word: e.g. ametabola -ous; the
latter in place of ametabolous, which indicates the possession of the
characters peculiar to the ametabola. Where there is an English and a
Latin ending, the former is usually given with the word and the other
is added: e.g. aequilate -us, instead of aequilatus, there being no
difference in the application. Usually the singular form of the word
is first given, and the plural ending is added; e.g.

     antenna -ae,

     cenchrus -ri,

     desideratum -ata;

but occasionally, when the plural is more commonly used, e.g.
epimera -eron, this is reversed and the singular ending is added: when
the two are different in form, e.g. foot and feet, the words are given
separately, and so when there is a difference in the application, as in

     uncus and unci.

In the definition of color terms the words in brackets [ ] refer to the
equivalent color as named on the plate, or the combination needed to
produce it.

The names in parentheses ( ) are those of the writers whose definitions
are used, or who have used the term in the sense defined. In the
terms of venation, these parentheses occur most frequently.

Most of the signs and abbreviations are those in common use

     :=     equal to, or the same as;

     q.v.   which see;

     pl.    plural;

     abb.   abbreviated.

The abbreviated names are: Comst. for Comstock; Coq. for
Coquillett; Meig. for Meigen; Nort. for Norton: O. S. for
Osten-Sacken: and Will. for Williston.


A

A: prefix, is privative; wanting or without.

Ab: off; away from.

Abbreviated: cut short; not of usual length.

Abdomen: the third or posterior division of the insect body: consists
normally of nine or ten apparent segments, but actual number is a
mooted question: bears no functional legs in the adult stage.

Abdominal: belonging or pertaining to the abdomen.

Abdominal feet: see pro-legs.

Abdominal groove: the concave lobe of the inner margin of secondaries
enveloping the abdomen beneath, in some butterflies.

Abdominal pouch: in female Parnassiids, a sac-like ventral cavity,
formed by material secreted during copulation.

Abductor: applied to muscles that open out or extend an appendage or
draw it away from the body: see adductor.

Abductor mandibulae: the muscle that opens the mandibles.

Aberrant: unusual; out of the ordinary course.

Aberration: a form that departs in some striking way from the normal
type; either single or occurring rarely, at irregular intervals.

Abiogenesis: spontaneous generation.

Abnormal: outside the usual range or course; not normal.

Aborted: a structure developed so as to be unfit for its normal function
obsolete or atrophied.

Abraded: scraped or rubbed.

Abrupt: suddenly or without gradation.

Abscissus: cut off squarely, with a straight margin.

Absconditus: hidden, concealed; retracted into another.

Acalyptrata: those muscid flies in which alulae are absent or
rudimentary.

Acanthus: a spine, spur or prickle.

Acaudal -ate: without a tail.

Accessory: added, or in addition to.

Accessory carinae: in Orthoptera the lateral carinae of the face.

Accessory cell: a cell not commonly present in the group; in some
orders of definite location as, e.g. in Lepidoptera, usually a small cell
at the end of the subcosta, giving rise directly or indirectly to veins 7
to 10:= 1st radius 2 (Comst.); = areole.

Accessory glands: any glands opening into the ducts of the
reproductive system.

Accessory sac: a glandular structure of the female reproductive
system containing a sticky secretion.

Accessory subcostal vein: the vein given off from the subcosta and
branching toward the apex of the wing in Perlidae.

Aceous or aceus: suffix; similar to, or of the nature of.

Acephalous: without a head.

Acerata: arthropods without true antennae Arachnids and Limulus

Acetabular caps: Hemiptera; the coxal cavity.

Acetabuliform: like a shallow saucer with more or less incurved sides.

Acetabulum: the cavity into which an appendage is articulated;
specifically the coxal cavity, - q.v.; also applied to a
cup-like cavity in the sucking mouth of maggots.

Achreioptera: ordinal term proposed for the coleopterous family
Platypsyllidae.

Achromatic: free from color; tissue that does not stain readily.

Acicular: needle-shaped; with a long, slender point.

Aciculate: a surface that appears as if scratched with a needle.

Acidotheca: the pupal sheath of the ovipositor.

Acini: granulations, like those on a blackberry: the terminal secreting
tubes of glands.

Acinose -ous: a surface set with acini.

Acone: applied to compound eyes in which the individual ocelli  have
no crystalline cone or lens; see eucone. {Scanner's note: this is no
longer a valid usage for the word "ocelli".  Currently the term is.  See
"ocellus" and "ommatidium".}

Acoustic nerve: connects the auditory pits or other organs of hearing
with special ganglia.

Acridophagus: preying and feeding on grasshoppers.

Acrostichal bristles: Diptera; two rows of bristles on the middle of the
dorsum; specifically, minute peculiar bristles on the dorso-central
region of Dolichopodidae.

Aculeata: Hymenoptera; the stingers, including bees and wasps.

Aculeate: prickly; armed with short, sharp spines; specifically, in
Hymenoptera furnished with a sting which is a modified ovipositor
and connected with a poison sac.

Aculeus -ei: a prickle; a small sharp point; specifically, an ovipositor,
especially when sting-like, as in Hymenoptera; in male Tipulidae a
slender, horny, often curved and pointed piece, projected when the
forceps is open.

Acuminate: tapering to a long point.

Acupunctate: a surface with fine punctures as if made with a needle.

Acutangulate: forming, or meeting in an acute angle.

Acute: pointed: terminating in or forming less than a right angle.

Acutilingual: with a sharp pointed tongue or mouth structure, as in
some bees.

Acutilingues: bees with a short pointed tongue: see obtusilingues.

Addorsal: close to but not quite on the middle of the dorsum.

Addorsal line: in caterpillars, is longitudinal, a little to one
side of the dorsal and between it and the subdorsal line.

Adductor: applied to muscles that draw an appendage to the body
or bring parts into apposition: see abductor.

Adductor mandibulae: the muscle that draws in or closes
the mandible.

Adeloceratous: with concealed antennae: see cryptocerata.

Adephagous: belonging to the Adephaga: pentamerous, predatory,
terrestrial beetles with filiform antennae and predatory habits: see
hydradephagous.

Adherent: attached or clinging to.

Adipose: fat or fatty: see fat-body.

Adiscota: insects that develop into adults without forming imaginal
discs; see discota.

Adminicula: supports or props: the spinous processes on the
abdomen of boring and burrowing pupae.

Adnate: adjoining; adhering or growing together: closely connected.

Adpressed: laid or pressed to; contiguous.

Adsperse -us: with markings of closely crowded small spots.

Adsternal: situated next or close to the sternum.

Adult: the stage when an insect is sexually mature and ready to
reproduce normally.

Aduncate -cus, -catus: a part gradually bent through its whole extent.

Adventitious: occurring accidentally, out of the ordinary course,
without apparent reason.

Adventral line: in caterpillars, extends along the under side between
the middle and the base of legs.

Adventral tubercle: on the abdominal segments of caterpillars on the
inner base of the leg, and correspondingly on the apodal segments;
