LITTLE BLUE BOOK NO. 860
 Edited by E. Haldeman-Julius

 Our Insect Enemies

 Vance Randolph

 Drawings by Peter Quinn

 HALDEMAN-JULIUS COMPANY
 GIRARD, KANSAS


 Copyrighted, 1925,
 Haldeman-Julius Company




CONTENTS


                                  Page

 Houseflies and Their Kindred       4

 Mosquitoes and Disease            28

 Life Among the Bedbugs            43

 Lice, Crabs and Cooties           47

 Our Friend the Cockroach          54

 Chiggers, Ticks and Fleas         57


PRINTED IN THE UNITED STATES OF AMERICA




LIST OF ILLUSTRATIONS

                                                                     Page

 Fig. I. The Metamorphosis of the Housefly (_Musca domestica_).       12

 Fig. II. Malaria and its Carrier.                                    33

 Fig. III. Three kinds of Lice.                                       51

 Fig. IV. Some Common Cockroaches.                                    58

 Fig. V. Chiggers and Ticks.                                          61






OUR INSECT ENEMIES




HOUSEFLIES AND THEIR KINDRED


The common housefly (_Musca domestica_) is perhaps more thoroughly
domesticated than any other insect; it lives and flourishes wherever
man has established his settlements, and does not thrive elsewhere. It
is mentioned by many of the ancient writers, and has evidently been
associated with man from the remotest antiquity, doubtless adapting
itself gradually to his changing modes of life. It still breeds in the
refuse which accumulates about his buildings, and still invades his
home to partake of his food. When one considers the number of flies
which get into modern dwellings despite glass and wire and modern
insecticides, it is difficult to understand how our sturdy fathers
managed to survive the summers in mediaeval Europe. Picture Thomas
Aquinas battling with swarms of flies for his food! The housefly’s
favorite breeding place has always been in horse manure, and man has
until recent years had great quantities of this nutritious substance
about him; with the coming of the automobile this condition has been
changed somewhat, but even the cleanest of American cities still
affords sufficient decaying matter to assure a bountiful crop of flies.
At some future day perhaps we shall have cities so spotless that there
will be nowhere a speck of garbage large enough to nourish a maggot,
but that day is still to come, and it doth not yet appear what we shall
be.

Meanwhile, as Herrick says, the housefly is with us always. “They are
present from early spring to late fall, even remaining far into the
winter. They are troublesome in kitchens and dining rooms because of
their abundance, their proneness to get into food, and their generally
filthy habits. Until recent years the housefly has been generally
regarded as somewhat of a scavenger and has been considered of value
to humanity because of its aid in the removal of wastes that are a
menace to human welfare. The eggs of the housefly are often deposited
on decaying vegetable matter that is allowed to accumulate in the
vicinity of human habitations and the maggots that hatch from the eggs
live on this decaying matter and aid in destroying it. Thus it must be
conceded, perhaps, that houseflies do assist somewhat in the removal of
foul and dangerous waste matters and, to this extent, are of benefit.
On the other hand, it has been conclusively shown that this modicum
of benefit is greatly overbalanced by their role in disseminating
dangerous diseases. It has been shown that houseflies carry the germs
of cholera, typhoid fever, cholera infantum, and tropical dysentery on
their feet, legs, bodies and in their digestive tracts. There can be no
doubt of the responsibility of the housefly for much sickness and many
deaths.”

Although the adult housefly is equally fond of fresh and putrid matter,
flitting from filth to food and back again, the eggs are always laid in
decaying substances, preferably horse manure. In the absence of this
delicacy the eggs may be deposited in human excrement, or even cow
manure if it is not too dry. A single female fly often deposits one
hundred and fifty eggs at a single sitting, and lays as many as six or
seven hundred in the course of a season.

The egg is white and shaped like a grain of wheat; it measures
about one-twentieth of an inch in length, and hatches in from ten
to twenty-four hours, the period of incubation varying with the
temperature. The second or larval stage is represented by a wormlike
creature called a maggot, which crawls about and devours great
quantities of nourishing manure. When the maggot is about five or six
days old it has attained a length of nearly three-eighths of an inch,
and transforms into the pupa; it is no longer active, ceases to take
food, and the outer skin turns into a hard, brown, dry case called a
puparium. After five or six days of rest the puparium is burst open and
the adult fly crawls out.

The newly emerged flies mate within two or three days, and the young
females are soon laying their first batch of eggs. Thus the whole
development may occur in about fourteen days, and Herrick thinks that
in Washington, D. C., it may be complete in ten days or less, according
to the temperature, with ten or twelve generations in a summer. “One
can hardly realize,” says Herrick, “the enormous numbers that such
rapid development is capable of producing. Inside of two months, one
female fly can give rise to many millions of progeny. For the purpose
of illustration, we will assume that a female fly lays 100 eggs. If
these hatch and all the larvae come to maturity, about one-half will
probably be males and the other half females. Then at the end of the
first generation there will be fifty egg-laying females. At this rate,
at the end of the eighth generation there would be produced about
1,875,000,000,000 adults. Of course, in nature, a very large part of
these would die before reaching maturity, so that actually one female
would probably never produce such an enormous number of individuals.
However, even under normal conditions tremendous numbers are produced.”

The adult housefly is unhappily too familiar to require a lengthy
description. The total length is about one-fourth of an inch, there are
two membranous wings and six hairy legs, while the thorax is gray with
four dark longitudinal stripes above. Besides the hairs and bristles on
the body and legs, which entangle great numbers of germs, the sticky
_pulvilli_ of the feet gather bacteria as if they had been especially
developed for that purpose. Thus every housefly scatters bacteria
broadcast wherever he goes; one has only to allow a fly to walk
across a plate of sterile gelatin to see large colonies of bacteria
produced in every foot-print. Esten and Mason’s examination of some 400
specimens showed that the number of bacteria carried ranged from 550 to
6,600,000 per fly, with an average of nearly a million and a quarter.

The general impression is that the housefly does not travel any great
distance from its birth-place, but there is considerable doubt
about this matter. Hewitt has taken them flying at least eighty feet
above the ground, and it is obvious that small insects which rise
so high may be carried long distances by the wind. Copeman, Howlett
and Merriman have attacked the problem by marking large numbers of
specimens, releasing them, and then watching for them in traps set at
various distances; they recovered several which had travelled more than
three-fourths of a mile. Dr. Hodge found plenty of houseflies on the
cribs of the Cleveland waterworks, which are located six miles out in
Lake Erie, and which offer no breeding places for flies. He naturally
concluded that they were blown six miles by the wind.

It has been pretty well established that adult flies do not retain
and disseminate disease germs which they swallowed as maggots in the
manure, but only those which they acquire in the adult state. It has
been definitely proved, however, that the bacilli of typhoid fever are
carried on the bodies and legs of houseflies, and also that the bacilli
are often swallowed and survive the passage through the body, as living
bacilli have frequently been demonstrated in flyspecks. The most
important practical consideration is, of course, the actual frequency
with which houseflies do transfer pathogenic organisms from filth to
food intended for human consumption, thus spreading disease, and this
is in its very nature a difficult matter to investigate.

Typhoid fever is a disease affecting the intestines, and the bacilli
which cause it frequently remain in the body for long periods after
the patient has apparently recovered. The germs are passed out in the
urine and fecal matter. As Herrick puts it: “If the excreta or urine
containing these bacilli are deposited where they are accessible to
flies, for instance in open privies, the chances are high that the
bacilli will be carried on the bodies of these insects back to the
kitchens and dining rooms and be deposited on our food. During the
Spanish-American War, flies were traced by their whitened feet from
the lime-sprinkled, open latrines or privies to the dining tables of
the soldiers in camp. It makes one shudder to think of the thousands
of open closets in the small towns of the United States to which flies
have access and in which they breed and from which they may come direct
to our kitchens and dining rooms.”

Excluding the greater variability of the water supply, the fact that
typhoid is so much more prevalent in country districts than in the
city may be due almost entirely to the abundance of flies, since
other opportunities for infection are no greater than in the city.
Certain South American cities have very good water, but typhoid rages
nevertheless, because the natives expose their excreta within a few
feet of the street markets, and myriads of flies carry the bacilli
from the dunghill to the food. “In our own country,” says Brues, “the
seasonal incidence of typhoid fever corresponds to some extent with fly
prevalence, and still more significant is its greater summer prevalence
in regions where systems for sewage disposal are not generally
installed.... The greater uniformity throughout the year in New York,
where the opportunities for fly-borne infection are curtailed, is very
marked. Another way in which the housefly can aid in the spread of
typhoid is through infecting milk on dairy farms where carriers are
present and offer the flies a chance to become infected.”

The vessels in an ordinary country dairy are nearly always more or less
accessible to flies, and warm milk is an excellent medium in which to
cultivate bacteria. When a fly which has been feeding on the excreta
of a typhoid patient falls into a can of milk, there is a very good
chance that the disease may be spread all along the milkman’s route.
Dr. Taylor, of the Colorado State Board of Health, reports a case of
this sort: “In the city of Denver we had a very sad as well as a plain
demonstration of the transmission of typhoid fever by flies and milk.
Early in August of this year the wife of a dairyman was taken with
typhoid fever, remaining at home about three weeks before her removal
to the hospital, August 28. During the first two weeks of September we
received reports of numerous cases of typhoid fever in the northern
portion of Denver, and upon investigation found that all these cases
had been securing their milk from this dairy.

“An inspection of the dairy was then made, and in addition to learning
of the illness of the dairyman’s wife, we also found the dairyman
himself suffering with a mild case of typhoid, but still up and
delivering milk. The water supply of the dairy was fairly good.
However, we found that the stools of both the wife and husband
had been deposited in an open privy vault located only thirty-five
feet from the milk house, which was unscreened and open to flies.
The gelatin cultures exposed for thirty minutes in the rear of the
privy vault and in the milk house among the milk cans gave numerous
colonies of typhoid bacilli, as well as colon bacilli and the ordinary
germ-life. The source of infection in the dairyman’s wife’s case is
unknown, but I am positive that in all the cases which occurred on this
milk route the infection was due to bacilli carried from this vault by
flies and deposited upon the milk cans, separator and utensils in the
milk house, thereby contaminating the milk. The dairyman supplied milk
to 143 customers. Fifty-five cases of typhoid fever occurred and three
deaths resulted therefrom.”

As long ago as 1873 Dr. Nichols noted that the number of cholera cases
on his ship seemed to vary directly with the abundance of flies. Later
experiments demonstrated the presence of the cholera bacillus upon the
bodies and in the excreta of flies fed upon cholera-infected material,
and it has been shown that flies sometimes transfer the cholera bacilli
from human excreta to milk. Dr. Tsuzuki, of the Japanese Army Medical
Service, found the germs of cholera upon flies taken in cholera-ridden
houses, and demonstrated that flies carry the organisms from place
to place. Macrae, commenting on an outbreak of cholera in a jail in
India, remarked that the place was infested with “a plague of flies ...
which were present in swarms when the disease broke out, and it was
an observation of daily experience to see them settling on cholera
stools whenever possible.” Dr. Macrae goes on to say that the flies
undoubtedly carried the cholera germs to the prisoners’ food, and adds:
“The practical lesson is, that flies should be looked upon in the light
of poisonous agencies of the worst kind during cholera epidemics, and
it is clear that if they find access to poison they will carry and
distribute it, and every possible means should be taken to prevent
their getting into contact with either food or drink of any kind, and
to those having to deal with large bodies of men it is a lesson more
easily learnt than put into practice.”

Because of the flies’ liking for expectorated saliva, it has long been
suspected that tuberculosis may be carried about by these insects.
Several investigators have carried out experiments in which flies have
been fed upon the sputa of consumptives, and the tuberculosis bacilli
have been found in their intestines and fly specks. Frederick T. Lord,
after a long series of laboratory investigations, concluded that: “(1)
Flies may ingest tubercular sputum and excrete tubercle bacilli, the
virulence of which may last for at least fifteen days. (2) The danger
of human infection from tubercular fly specks is by the ingestion
of the specks on food. Spontaneous liberation of tubercle bacill