A PAIR OF BLUE EYES

by Thomas Hardy




“A violet in the youth of primy nature,
Forward, not permanent, sweet not lasting,
The perfume and suppliance of a minute;
No more.” 




CONTENTS

 PREFACE
 Chapter I
 Chapter II
 Chapter III
 Chapter IV
 Chapter V
 Chapter VI
 Chapter VII
 Chapter VIII
 Chapter IX
 Chapter X
 Chapter XI
 Chapter XII
 Chapter XIII
 Chapter XIV
 Chapter XV
 Chapter XVI
 Chapter XVII
 Chapter XVIII
 Chapter XIX
 Chapter XX
 Chapter XXI
 Chapter XXII
 Chapter XXIII
 Chapter XXIV
 Chapter XXV
 Chapter XXVI
 Chapter XXVII
 Chapter XXVIII
 Chapter XXIX
 Chapter XXX
 Chapter XXXI
 Chapter XXXII
 Chapter XXXIII
 Chapter XXXIV
 Chapter XXXV
 Chapter XXXVI
 Chapter XXXVII
 Chapter XXXVIII
 Chapter XXXIX
 Chapter XL




PREFACE


The following chapters were written at a time when the craze for
indiscriminate church-restoration had just reached the remotest nooks
of western England, where the wild and tragic features of the coast had
long combined in perfect harmony with the crude Gothic Art of the
ecclesiastical buildings scattered along it, throwing into
extraordinary discord all architectural attempts at newness there. To
restore the grey carcases of a mediævalism whose spirit had fled,
seemed a not less incongruous act than to set about renovating the
adjoining crags themselves.

Hence it happened that an imaginary history of three human hearts,
whose emotions were not without correspondence with these material
circumstances, found in the ordinary incidents of such
church-renovations a fitting frame for its presentation.

The shore and country about “Castle Boterel” is now getting well known,
and will be readily recognized. The spot is, I may add, the furthest
westward of all those convenient corners wherein I have ventured to
erect my theatre for these imperfect little dramas of country life and
passions; and it lies near to, or no great way beyond, the vague border
of the Wessex kingdom on that side, which, like the westering verge of
modern American settlements, was progressive and uncertain.

This, however, is of little importance. The place is pre-eminently (for
one person at least) the region of dream and mystery. The ghostly
birds, the pall-like sea, the frothy wind, the eternal soliloquy of the
waters, the bloom of dark purple cast, that seems to exhale from the
shoreward precipices, in themselves lend to the scene an atmosphere
like the twilight of a night vision.

One enormous sea-bord cliff in particular figures in the narrative; and
for some forgotten reason or other this cliff was described in the
story as being without a name. Accuracy would require the statement to
be that a remarkable cliff which resembles in many points the cliff of
the description bears a name that no event has made famous.

T. H.


_March_ 1899




THE PERSONS

        ELFRIDE SWANCOURT            a young Lady
        CHRISTOPHER SWANCOURT        a Clergyman
        STEPHEN SMITH                an Architect
        HENRY KNIGHT                 a Reviewer and Essayist
        CHARLOTTE TROYTON            a rich Widow
        GERTRUDE JETHWAY             a poor Widow
        SPENSER HUGO LUXELLIAN       a Peer
        LADY LUXELLIAN               his Wife
        MARY AND KATE                two little Girls
        WILLIAM WORM                 a dazed Factotum
        JOHN SMITH                   a Master-mason
        JANE SMITH                   his Wife
        MARTIN CANNISTER             a Sexton
        UNITY                        a Maid-servant

Other servants, masons, labourers, grooms, nondescripts, etc., etc.


THE SCENE
 Mostly on the outskirts of Lower Wessex.




Chapter I


“A fair vestal, throned in the west”


Elfride Swancourt was a girl whose emotions lay very near the surface.
Their nature more precisely, and as modified by the creeping hours of
time, was known only to those who watched the circumstances of her
history.

Personally, she was the combination of very interesting particulars,
whose rarity, however, lay in the combination itself rather than in the
individual elements combined. As a matter of fact, you did not see the
form and substance of her features when conversing with her; and this
charming power of preventing a material study of her lineaments by an
interlocutor, originated not in the cloaking effect of a well-formed
manner (for her manner was childish and scarcely formed), but in the
attractive crudeness of the remarks themselves. She had lived all her
life in retirement—the _monstrari digito_ of idle men had not flattered
her, and at the age of nineteen or twenty she was no further on in
social consciousness than an urban young lady of fifteen.

One point in her, however, you did notice: that was her eyes. In them
was seen a sublimation of all of her; it was not necessary to look
further: there she lived.

These eyes were blue; blue as autumn distance—blue as the blue we see
between the retreating mouldings of hills and woody slopes on a sunny
September morning. A misty and shady blue, that had no beginning or
surface, and was looked INTO rather than AT.

As to her presence, it was not powerful; it was weak. Some women can
make their personality pervade the atmosphere of a whole banqueting
hall; Elfride’s was no more pervasive than that of a kitten.

Elfride had as her own the thoughtfulness which appears in the face of
the Madonna della Sedia, without its rapture: the warmth and spirit of
the type of woman’s feature most common to the beauties—mortal and
immortal—of Rubens, without their insistent fleshiness. The
characteristic expression of the female faces of Correggio—that of the
yearning human thoughts that lie too deep for tears—was hers sometimes,
but seldom under ordinary conditions.

The point in Elfride Swancourt’s life at which a deeper current may be
said to have permanently set in, was one winter afternoon when she
found herself standing, in the character of hostess, face to face with
a man she had never seen before—moreover, looking at him with a
Miranda-like curiosity and interest that she had never yet bestowed on
a mortal.

On this particular day her father, the vicar of a parish on the
sea-swept outskirts of Lower Wessex, and a widower, was suffering from
an attack of gout. After finishing her household supervisions Elfride
became restless, and several times left the room, ascended the
staircase, and knocked at her father’s chamber-door.

“Come in!” was always answered in a hearty out-of-door voice from the
inside.

“Papa,” she said on one occasion to the fine, red-faced, handsome man
of forty, who, puffing and fizzing like a bursting bottle, lay on the
bed wrapped in a dressing-gown, and every now and then enunciating, in
spite of himself, about one letter of some word or words that were
almost oaths; “papa, will you not come downstairs this evening?” She
spoke distinctly: he was rather deaf.

“Afraid not—eh-hh!—very much afraid I shall not, Elfride. Piph-ph-ph! I
can’t bear even a handkerchief upon this deuced toe of mine, much less
a stocking or slipper—piph-ph-ph! There ’tis again! No, I shan’t get up
till to-morrow.”

“Then I hope this London man won’t come; for I don’t know what I should
do, papa.”

“Well, it would be awkward, certainly.”

“I should hardly think he would come to-day.”

“Why?”

“Because the wind blows so.”

“Wind! What ideas you have, Elfride! Who ever heard of wind stopping a
man from doing his business? The idea of this toe of mine coming on so
suddenly!...If he should come, you must send him up to me, I suppose,
and then give him some food and put him to bed in some way. Dear me,
what a nuisance all this is!”

“Must he have dinner?”

“Too heavy for a tired man at the end of a tedious journey.”

“Tea, then?”

“Not substantial enough.”

“High tea, then? There is cold fowl, rabbit-pie, some pasties, and
things of that kind.”

“Yes, high tea.”

“Must I pour out his tea, papa?”

“Of course; you are the mistress of the house.”

“What! sit there all the time with a stranger, just as if I knew him,
and not anybody to introduce us?”

“Nonsense, child, about introducing; you know better than that. A
practical professional man, tired and hungry, who has been travelling
ever since daylight this morning, will hardly be inclined to talk and
air courtesies to-night. He wants food and shelter, and you must see
that he has it, simply because I am suddenly laid up and cannot. There
is nothing so dreadful in that, I hope? You get all kinds of stuff into
your head from reading so many of those novels.”

“Oh no; there is nothing dreadful in it when it becomes plainly a case
of necessity like this. But, you see, you are always there when people
come to dinner, even if we know them; and this is some strange London
man of the world, who will think it odd, perhaps.”

“Very well; let him.”

“Is he Mr. Hewby’s partner?”

“I should scarcely think so: he may be.”

“How old is he, I wonder?”

“That I cannot tell. You will find the copy of my letter to Mr. Hewby,
and his answer, upon the table in the study. You may read them, and
then you’ll know as much as I do about our visitor.”

“I have read them.”

“Well, what’s the use of asking questions, then? They contain all I
know. Ugh-h-h!...Od plague you, you young scamp! don’t put anything
there! I can’t bear the weight of a fly.”

“Oh, I am sorry, papa. I forgot; I thought you might be cold,” she
said, hastily removing the rug she had thrown upon the feet of the
sufferer; and waiting till she saw that consciousness of her offence
had passed from his face, she withdrew from the room, and retired again
downstairs.




Chapter II


“’Twas on the evening of a winter’s day.”


When two or three additional hours had merged the same afternoon in
evening, some moving outlines might have been observed against the sky
on the summit of a wild lone hill in that district. They circumscribed
two men, having at present the aspect of silhouettes, sitting in a
dog-cart and pushing along in the teeth of the wind. Scarcely a
solitary house or man had been visible along the whole dreary distance
of open country they were traversing; and now that night had begun to
fall, the faint twilight, which still gave an idea of the landscape to
their observation, was enlivened by the quiet appearance of the planet
Jupiter, momentarily gleaming in intenser brilliancy in front of them,
and by Sirius shedding his rays in rivalry from his position over their
shoulders. The only lights apparent on earth were some spots of dull
red, glowing here and there upon the distant hills, which, as the
driver of the vehicle gratuitously remarked to the hirer, were
smouldering fires for the consumption of peat and gorse-roots, where
the common was being broken up for agricultural purposes. The wind
prevailed with but little abatement from its daytime boisterousness,
three or four small clouds, delicate and pale, creeping along under the
sky southward to the Channel.

Fourteen of the sixteen miles intervening between the railway terminus
and the end of their journey had been gone over, when they began to
pass along the brink of a valley some miles in extent, wherein the
wintry skeletons of a more luxuriant vegetation than had hitherto
surrounded them proclaimed an increased richness of soil, which showed
signs of far more careful enclosure and management than had any slopes
they had yet passed. A little farther, and an opening in the elms
stretching up from this fertile valley revealed a mansion.

“That’s Endelstow House, Lord Luxellian’s,” said the driver.

“Endelstow House, Lord Luxellian’s,” repeated the other mechanically.
He then turned himself sideways, and keenly scrutinized the almost
invisible house with an interest which the indistinct picture itself
seemed far from adequate to create. “Yes, that’s Lord Luxellian’s,” he
said yet again after a while, as he still looked in the same direction.

“What, be we going there?”

“No; Endelstow Vicarage, as I have told you.”

“I thought you m’t have altered your mind, sir, as ye have stared that
way at nothing so long.”

“Oh no; I am interested in the house, that’s all.”

“Most people be, as the saying is.”

“Not in the sense that I am.”

“Oh!...Well, his family is no better than my own, ’a b’lieve.”

“How is that?”

“Hedgers and ditchers by rights. But once in ancient times one of ’em,
when he was at work, changed clothes with King Charles the Second, and
saved the king’s life. King Charles came up to him like a common man,
and said off-hand, ‘Man in the smock-frock, my name is Charles the
Second, and that’s the truth on’t. Will you lend me your clothes?’ ‘I
don’t mind if I do,’ said Hedger Luxellian; and they changed there and
then. ‘Now mind ye,’ King Charles the Second said, like a common man,
as he rode away, ‘if ever I come to the crown, you come to court, knock
at the door, and say out bold, “Is King Charles the Second at home?”
Tell your name, and they shall let you in, and you shall be made a
lord.’ Now, that was very nice of Master Charley?”

“Very nice indeed.”

“Well, as the story is, the king came to the throne; and some years
after that, away went Hedger Luxellian, knocked at the king’s door, and
asked if King Charles the Second was in. ‘No, he isn’t,’ they said.
‘Then, is Charles the Third?’ said Hedger Luxellian. ‘Yes,’ said a
young feller standing by like a common man, only he had a crown on, ‘my
name is Charles the Third.’ And——”

“I really fancy that must be a mistake. I don’t recollect anything in
English history about Charles the Third,” said the other in a tone of
mild remonstrance.

“Oh, that’s right history enough, only ’twasn’t prented; he was rather
a queer-tempered man, if you remember.”

“Very well; go on.”

“And, by hook or by crook, Hedger Luxellian was made a lord, and
everything went on well till some time after, when he got into a most
terrible row with King Charles the Fourth.

“I can’t stand Charles the Fourth. Upon my word, that’s too much.”

“Why? There was a George the Fourth, wasn’t there?”

“Certainly.”

“Well, Charleses be as common as Georges. However I’ll say no more
about it....Ah, well! ’tis the funniest world ever I lived in—upon my
life ’tis. Ah, that such should be!”

The dusk had thickened into darkness while they thus conversed, and the
outline and surface of the mansion gradually disappeared. The windows,
which had before been as black blots on a lighter expanse of wall,
became illuminated, and were transfigured to squares of light on the
general dark body of the night landscape as it absorbed the outlines of
the edifice into its gloomy monochrome.

Not another word was spo