THE MAN THAT CORRUPTED HADLEYBURG

AND OTHER STORIES AND SKETCHES

By Mark Twain


Note: (The title story may also be found as Etext file #1213)


CONTENTS:

     THE MAN THAT CORRUPTED HADLEYBURG
     MY FIRST LIE, AND HOW I GOT OUT OF IT
     THE ESQUIMAUX MAIDEN'S ROMANCE
     CHRISTIAN SCIENCE AND THE BOOK OF MRS. EDDY
     IS HE LIVING OR IS HE DEAD?
     MY DÉBUT AS A LITERARY PERSON
     AT THE APPETITE-CURE
     CONCERNING THE JEWS
     FROM THE 'LONDON TIMES' OF 1904
     ABOUT PLAY-ACTING
     TRAVELLING WITH A REFORMER
     DIPLOMATIC PAY AND CLOTHES
     LUCK
     THE CAPTAIN'S STORY
     STIRRING TIMES IN AUSTRIA
     MEISTERSCHAFT
     MY BOYHOOD DREAMS
     IN MEMORIAM





THE MAN THAT CORRUPTED HADLEYBURG

I


It was many years ago. Hadleyburg was the most honest and upright town
in all the region round about. It had kept that reputation unsmirched
during three generations, and was prouder of it than of any other of
its possessions. It was so proud of it, and so anxious to insure its
perpetuation, that it began to teach the principles of honest dealing
to its babies in the cradle, and made the like teachings the staple
of their culture thenceforward through all the years devoted to their
education. Also, throughout the formative years temptations were kept
out of the way of the young people, so that their honesty could have
every chance to harden and solidify, and become a part of their very
bone. The neighbouring towns were jealous of this honourable supremacy,
and affected to sneer at Hadleyburg's pride in it and call it vanity;
but all the same they were obliged to acknowledge that Hadleyburg was
in reality an incorruptible town; and if pressed they would also
acknowledge that the mere fact that a young man hailed from Hadleyburg
was all the recommendation he needed when he went forth from his natal
town to seek for responsible employment.

But at last, in the drift of time, Hadleyburg had the ill luck to offend
a passing stranger--possibly without knowing it, certainly without
caring, for Hadleyburg was sufficient unto itself, and cared not a rap
for strangers or their opinions. Still, it would have been well to
make an exception in this one's case, for he was a bitter man, and
revengeful. All through his wanderings during a whole year he kept his
injury in mind, and gave all his leisure moments to trying to invent a
compensating satisfaction for it. He contrived many plans, and all of
them were good, but none of them was quite sweeping enough: the poorest
of them would hurt a great many individuals, but what he wanted was a
plan which would comprehend the entire town, and not let so much as one
person escape unhurt. At last he had a fortunate idea, and when it fell
into his brain it lit up his whole head with an evil joy. He began to
form a plan at once, saying to himself “That is the thing to do--I will
corrupt the town.”

Six months later he went to Hadleyburg, and arrived in a buggy at the
house of the old cashier of the bank about ten at night. He got a sack
out of the buggy, shouldered it, and staggered with it through the
cottage yard, and knocked at the door. A woman's voice said “Come in,”
 and he entered, and set his sack behind the stove in the parlour, saying
politely to the old lady who sat reading the “Missionary Herald” by the
lamp:

“Pray keep your seat, madam, I will not disturb you. There--now it is
pretty well concealed; one would hardly know it was there. Can I see
your husband a moment, madam?”

No, he was gone to Brixton, and might not return before morning.

“Very well, madam, it is no matter. I merely wanted to leave that sack
in his care, to be delivered to the rightful owner when he shall be
found. I am a stranger; he does not know me; I am merely passing through
the town to-night to discharge a matter which has been long in my mind.
My errand is now completed, and I go pleased and a little proud, and
you will never see me again. There is a paper attached to the sack which
will explain everything. Good-night, madam.”

The old lady was afraid of the mysterious big stranger, and was glad to
see him go. But her curiosity was roused, and she went straight to the
sack and brought away the paper. It began as follows:

   “TO BE PUBLISHED, or, the right man sought out by private
   inquiry--either will answer.  This sack contains gold coin weighing
   a hundred and sixty pounds four ounces--”

 “Mercy on us, and the door not locked!”

Mrs. Richards flew to it all in a tremble and locked it, then pulled
down the window-shades and stood frightened, worried, and wondering if
there was anything else she could do toward making herself and the
money more safe. She listened awhile for burglars, then surrendered to
curiosity, and went back to the lamp and finished reading the paper:

“I am a foreigner, and am presently going back to my own country, to
remain there permanently. I am grateful to America for what I have
received at her hands during my long stay under her flag; and to one of
her citizens--a citizen of Hadleyburg--I am especially grateful for a
great kindness done me a year or two ago. Two great kindnesses in fact.
I will explain. I was a gambler. I say I WAS. I was a ruined gambler.
I arrived in this village at night, hungry and without a penny. I asked
for help--in the dark; I was ashamed to beg in the light. I begged of
the right man. He gave me twenty dollars--that is to say, he gave me
life, as I considered it. He also gave me fortune; for out of that money
I have made myself rich at the gaming-table. And finally, a remark
which he made to me has remained with me to this day, and has at last
conquered me; and in conquering has saved the remnant of my morals: I
shall gamble no more. Now I have no idea who that man was, but I want
him found, and I want him to have this money, to give away, throw away,
or keep, as he pleases. It is merely my way of testifying my gratitude
to him. If I could stay, I would find him myself; but no matter, he will
be found. This is an honest town, an incorruptible town, and I know
I can trust it without fear. This man can be identified by the remark
which he made to me; I feel persuaded that he will remember it.

“And now my plan is this: If you prefer to conduct the inquiry
privately, do so. Tell the contents of this present writing to any one
who is likely to be the right man. If he shall answer, 'I am the man;
the remark I made was so-and-so,' apply the test--to wit: open the sack,
and in it you will find a sealed envelope containing that remark. If the
remark mentioned by the candidate tallies with it, give him the money,
and ask no further questions, for he is certainly the right man.

“But if you shall prefer a public inquiry, then publish this present
writing in the local paper--with these instructions added, to wit:
Thirty days from now, let the candidate appear at the town-hall at eight
in the evening (Friday), and hand his remark, in a sealed envelope, to
the Rev. Mr. Burgess (if he will be kind enough to act); and let Mr.
Burgess there and then destroy the seals of the sack, open it, and see
if the remark is correct: if correct, let the money be delivered, with
my sincere gratitude, to my benefactor thus identified.”

Mrs. Richards sat down, gently quivering with excitement, and was soon
lost in thinkings--after this pattern: “What a strange thing it is! ...
And what a fortune for that kind man who set his bread afloat upon the
waters!... If it had only been my husband that did it!--for we are so
poor, so old and poor!...” Then, with a sigh--“But it was not my Edward;
no, it was not he that gave a stranger twenty dollars. It is a pity too;
I see it now....” Then, with a shudder--“But it is GAMBLERS' money! the
wages of sin; we couldn't take it; we couldn't touch it. I don't like to
be near it; it seems a defilement.” She moved to a farther chair... “I
wish Edward would come, and take it to the bank; a burglar might come at
any moment; it is dreadful to be here all alone with it.”

At eleven Mr. Richards arrived, and while his wife was saying “I am SO
glad you've come!” he was saying, “I am so tired--tired clear out; it is
dreadful to be poor, and have to make these dismal journeys at my time
of life. Always at the grind, grind, grind, on a salary--another man's
slave, and he sitting at home in his slippers, rich and comfortable.”

“I am so sorry for you, Edward, you know that; but be comforted; we have
our livelihood; we have our good name--”

“Yes, Mary, and that is everything. Don't mind my talk--it's just a
moment's irritation and doesn't mean anything. Kiss me--there, it's all
gone now, and I am not complaining any more. What have you been getting?
What's in the sack?”

Then his wife told him the great secret. It dazed him for a moment; then
he said:

“It weighs a hundred and sixty pounds? Why, Mary, it's for-ty thousand
dollars--think of it--a whole fortune! Not ten men in this village are
worth that much. Give me the paper.”

He skimmed through it and said:

“Isn't it an adventure! Why, it's a romance; it's like the impossible
things one reads about in books, and never sees in life.” He was well
stirred up now; cheerful, even gleeful. He tapped his old wife on the
cheek, and said humorously, “Why, we're rich, Mary, rich; all we've
got to do is to bury the money and burn the papers. If the gambler ever
comes to inquire, we'll merely look coldly upon him and say: 'What is
this nonsense you are talking? We have never heard of you and your sack
of gold before;' and then he would look foolish, and--”

“And in the meantime, while you are running on with your jokes, the
money is still here, and it is fast getting along toward burglar-time.”

“True. Very well, what shall we do--make the inquiry private? No, not
that; it would spoil the romance. The public method is better. Think
what a noise it will make! And it will make all the other towns jealous;
for no stranger would trust such a thing to any town but Hadleyburg,
and they know it. It's a great card for us. I must get to the
printing-office now, or I shall be too late.”

“But stop--stop--don't leave me here alone with it, Edward!”

But he was gone. For only a little while, however. Not far from his
own house he met the editor--proprietor of the paper, and gave him the
document, and said “Here is a good thing for you, Cox--put it in.”

“It may be too late, Mr. Richards, but I'll see.”

At home again, he and his wife sat down to talk the charming mystery
over; they were in no condition for sleep. The first question was, Who
could the citizen have been who gave the stranger the twenty dollars? It
seemed a simple one; both answered it in the same breath--

“Barclay Goodson.”

“Yes,” said Richards, “he could have done it, and it would have been
like him, but there's not another in the town.”

“Everybody will grant that, Edward--grant it privately, anyway. For six
months, now, the village has been its own proper self once more--honest,
narrow, self-righteous, and stingy.”

“It is what he always called it, to the day of his death--said it right
out publicly, too.”

“Yes, and he was hated for it.”

“Oh, of course; but he didn't care. I reckon he was the best-hated man
among us, except the Reverend Burgess.”

“Well, Burgess deserves it--he will never get another congregation here.
Mean as the town is, it knows how to estimate HIM. Edward, doesn't it
seem odd that the stranger should appoint Burgess to deliver the money?”

“Well, yes--it does. That is--that is--”

“Why so much that-IS-ing? Would YOU select him?”

“Mary, maybe the stranger knows him better than this village does.”

“Much THAT would help Burgess!”

The husband seemed perplexed for an answer; the wife kept a steady eye
upon him, and waited. Finally Richards said, with the hesitancy of one
who is making a statement which is likely to encounter doubt,

“Mary, Burgess is not a bad man.”

His wife was certainly surprised.

“Nonsense!” she exclaimed.

“He is not a bad man. I know. The whole of his unpopularity had its
foundation in that one thing--the thing that made so much noise.”

“That 'one thing,' indeed! As if that 'one thing' wasn't enough, all by
itself.”

“Plenty. Plenty. Only he wasn't guilty of it.”

“How you talk! Not guilty of it! Everybody knows he WAS guilty.”

“Mary, I give you my word--he was innocent.”

“I can't believe it and I don't. How do you know?”

“It is a confession. I am ashamed, but I will make it. I was the only
man who knew he was innocent. I could have saved him, and--and--well,
you know how the town was wrought up--I hadn't the pluck to do it. It
would have turned everybody against me. I felt mean, ever so mean; but I
didn't dare; I hadn't the manliness to face that.”

Mary looked troubled, and for a while was silent. Then she said
stammeringly:

“I--I don't think it would have done for you to--to--One
mustn't--er--public opinion--one has to be so careful--so--” It was a
difficult road, and she got mired; but after a little she got started
again. “It was a great pity, but--Why, we couldn't afford it, Edward--we
couldn't indeed. Oh, I wouldn't have had you do it for anything!”

“It would have lost us the good-will of so many people, Mary; and
then--and then--”

“What troubles me now is, what HE thinks of us, Edward.”

“He? HE doesn't suspect that I could have saved him.”

“Oh,” exclaimed the wife, in a tone of relief, “I am glad of that. As
long as he doesn't know that you could have saved him, he--he--well that
makes it a great deal better. Why, I might have known he didn't
know, because he is always trying to be friendly with us, as little
encouragement as we give him. More than once people have twitted me with
it. There's the Wilsons, and the Wilcoxes, and the Harknesses, they take
a mean pleasure in saying 'YOUR FRIEND Burgess,' because they know it
pesters me. I wish he wouldn't persist in liking us so; I can't think
why he keeps it up.”

“I can explain it. It's another confession. When the thing was new and
hot, and the town made a plan to ride him on a rail, my conscience
hurt me so that I couldn't stand it, and I went privately and gave him
notice, and he got out of the town and stayed out till it was safe to
come back.”

“Edward! If the town had found it out--”

“DON'T! It scares me yet, to think of it. I repented of it the minute it
was done; and I was even afraid to tell you lest your face might betray
it to somebody. I didn't sleep any that night, for worrying. But after a
few days I saw that no one was going to suspect me, and after that I got
to feeling glad I did it. And I feel glad yet, Mary--glad through and
through.”

“So do I, now, for it would have been a dreadful